-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

RxJS is the JavaScript port of ReactiveX, a library for composing asynchronous, event-based programs using observable streams. Angular has used RxJS as its primary async model since the beginning (HttpClient returns Observables, Router events are streams, forms expose value Changes ).
Even with the rise of signals, RxJS isn't going anywhere, for streams of values over time (typing in a search box, websocket messages, polling, multi-step async pipelines), Observables are still the right shape.

The mental model: Promises are one-shot async results; Observables are async sequences. A click handler can produce many events; an H T T P polling loop emits many responses; a websocket emits messages forever. Promises can't model these naturally; Observables can.

Why interviewers ask: RxJS is the most-asked Angular topic and the biggest junior to senior gap.
Knowing the difference between merge Map and switch Map, when to use BehaviorSubject versus ReplaySubject, and how to avoid memory leaks separates engineers who copy patterns from Stack Overflow from those who can design reactive flows.

When NOT to use: simple one-shot async (use Promise / async or await / firstValueFrom ). Pure state values that don't change over time (use signals). Computational pipelines on arrays (use plain JS / lodash; RxJS is for streams over time).

Where the versions actually stand. Angular v22 shipped 3 June 2026 and still declares a peer dependency of rxjs@6.5.3 || 7.4.0, RxJS is not being removed from Angular, and no RxJS 6 code has been locked out either. The latest published stable RxJS is 7.8.2 (February 2025).
The next major was renumbered along the way: the 8.0.0-alpha line stopped at 8.0.0-alpha.14 (January 2024), and the work resurfaced as 9.0.0-beta.0, published 4 August 2026 (its changelog diffs against 8.0.0-alpha.14 ).
Two consequences worth having straight before an interview: every @deprecated. will be removed in v8 note in the RxJS source means "removed in the next major", and that major is now numbered 9; and nothing has actually been removed from the version you are shipping today.

The question this page exists to answer. Signals have been stable since v17, to Signal / to Observable since v20, and resource / rx Resource / http Resource since v22. So the senior-level question is no longer "what does merge Map do", it is when do you still reach for RxJS at all.
The answer worth being able to defend in one sentence: signals model a value that has a current state; Observables model events that happen in time.
Anything where when matters, debouncing, cancelling work already in flight, retry with backoff, resolving a race, guaranteeing order, replaying history, a socket that pushes, is an Observable problem, and no amount of computed() turns it into a signal problem.
Anything that is "the current thing on screen" is a signal problem, and expressing it as a BehaviorSubject in 2026 is a habit rather than a design.

In the real world: a team migrating a v13 app to signals did a service-by-service pass turning every BehaviorSubject into a signal(). The state services converted cleanly and the diff looked like a win. Then the typeahead broke.
The old pipeline was search Term$.pipe(debounce Time(300), distinctUntilChanged(), switch Map(term goes to api.search(term))); the signal rewrite was effect(() goes to this.search(this.term())), which fired a request per keystroke and rendered whichever response happened to land last.
It looked fine on a laptop against localhost and produced visibly wrong results over conference Wi-Fi. They put search back on RxJS and converted only at the edge with to Signal.
The sentence to carry into an interview: effect() is not subscribe(), it has no debounce and no cancel-the-previous semantics, so everywhere you were relying on switch Map to discard stale work, a naive effect races instead.

In the real world: an architecture review deferred an RxJS cleanup with "we'll do it when we move to RxJS 8, it's nearly out." That was 2023.
The last v8 alpha shipped in January 2024, the major was later renumbered, and 9.0.0-beta.0 did not appear until August 2026, roughly three years of a migration plan pinned to a release that never arrived.
Meanwhile every one of the deprecations they were waiting on ( to Promise, multicast, publish*, ref Count, retry When ) was replaceable inside 7.x, one small pull request at a time, with no version bump at all.
A deprecation is a thing you can retire today; the major release is only the day the compiler stops being polite about it.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Observable, Observer, Subscription.

Three callbacks: next (each emitted value), error (terminates the stream with an error), complete (terminates cleanly). After error or complete, no more values.

The convention: Observables end with a $ suffix. users$, search Term$, clicks$. Reading code is much easier with the convention.

-- pause --
Cold versus hot Observables.

Cold Observables are unicast, each subscriber gets its own execution. The producer code (the (subscriber) goes to {. } ) runs from scratch per subscribe.

HttpClient.get() returns cold Observables, every subscribe issues a new H T T P request. This is why you sometimes see "my service is being called twice."

Hot Observables are multicast, one shared execution; all subscribers see the same values.

DOM events (clicks, websocket messages) are inherently hot, they happen whether you're listening or not.

share Replay turns cold into hot:

share Replay(1) keeps the last 1 emitted value and replays to new subscribers, common for caching A P I responses.

Know what share Replay actually expands to, because the interview follow-up is always about its resets. In RxJS 7 it is implemented in terms of share:

So share Replay(1) is share Replay({ buffer Size: 1, ref Count: false }), and ref Count: false is the setting most codebases pick up by accident. It means the operator subscribes to the source once and never unsubscribes.
On a finite source (one H T T P response) that costs one retained value and no invalidation. On an infinite source ( interval, a socket, from Event(window, 'resize') ) it is a permanent subscription that no component teardown can ever reach, the classic "the app gets slower the longer it runs" leak.

In the real world: a dashboard cached its "current tenant" lookup with share Replay(1) in a provided In: 'root' service.
Correct, cheap, and a support ticket six months later: an admin who switched tenants kept seeing the previous tenant's numbers until a hard refresh, because ref Count: false gives a cache with no invalidation story at all, it holds the first response for the lifetime of the tab.
The fix was not a different operator. It was to stop pretending an operator was a cache: hold the value in something they owned (a signal, or a BehaviorSubject ) written by an explicit load Tenant(), so "invalidate" became a line of code instead of an emergent property of an operator's defaults.
The reviewable rule they wrote down: share Replay is a de-duplicator for concurrent subscribers, not a cache with a lifecycle.

-- pause --
Subjects, the bridge between imperative and reactive.

A Subject is both an Observable AND an Observer, you can next() values into it AND subscribe to it. Used to bridge imperative code (button click handler) with reactive (downstream Observable chain).

Four flavors:

Subject, maps to, No initial value; subscribers get only values emitted after they subscribe.
BehaviorSubject, maps to, Has a current value; new subscribers immediately get the latest.
ReplaySubject(n), maps to, Replays the last N values to new subscribers.
AsyncSubject, maps to, Emits only the last value, only on complete (rare).

BehaviorSubject is the workhorse for "current state":

In modern Angular, signals ( signal([]) ) replace this pattern, but tons of existing code uses BehaviorSubject. Both are valid.

Two Subject behaviours that decide production incidents, and that interviewers use to separate "I've used a Subject" from "I've debugged one":

A Subject that errors is dead permanently, for everyone. error() terminates the Subject itself, not just the current subscribers. Every later subscribe() receives that same error immediately, and every later next() is dropped silently.
A BehaviorSubject -backed store that lets an H T T P failure reach its error channel takes the whole feature down until the page is reloaded, and the stack trace points at the store rather than at the request that killed it.
Keep errors out of your state Subject: catch at the edge and push an error-shaped value ( { status: 'error', message } ) instead.
.value is a synchronous peek, not a subscription. Reading subject.value inside a handler that is itself running during that Subject's emission is a re-entrancy trap, you are reading state mid-update, and the read order becomes dependent on subscription order.
It is the same class of bug as reading a signal you are also writing inside an effect.

-- pause --
Multicasting in RxJS 7, share, connectable, and the deprecated operators.

RxJS 7 (April 2021) replaced the entire multicast family with two things: a fully configurable share(), and connectable() for the case where you need to decide when the shared subscription starts.
If your codebase still contains publish Replay(1), ref Count(), that is a v6 idiom and the interviewer will notice.

share(config), the configuration object landed in 7.0; notifier factories for the resets landed in 7.1. The defaults, straight from the source:

All three reset options also accept a notifier factory ( () goes to ObservableInput ) instead of a boolean, which is the feature almost nobody knows and which solves a real problem:

connectable(source, config), the v7 replacement for multicast + ConnectableObservable. The source stays dormant until you call connect(), which hands you back the Subscription that owns the shared connection:

Use it when the lifetime of the shared subscription must be owned by something other than "whether anyone is currently subscribed", an app-level service that connects on login and disconnects on logout, for instance. For everything else share / share Replay is the right tool.
The related connect(selector) operator (also new in 7.0) multicasts a source within a single pipeline so you can fan it out and recombine it without a second subscription to the source.

What is deprecated, and what the annotations literally say (RxJS 7.8.2 source):

multicast(.), "Will be removed in v8. To create a connectable observable, use connectable.", connectable() or connect().
publish(), publish(selector), "Will be removed in v8.", connectable() / connect().
publish Replay, publish Behavior, publish Last, same family, share({ connector }) with the matching Subject.
ref Count(), "Replaced with the share operator.", share().
retry When(notifier), "Will be removed in v9 or v10, use retry 's delay option instead.", retry({ count, delay }).
to Promise(), "Replaced with firstValueFrom and lastValueFrom. Will be removed in v8.", see the Promise-interop section.
merge Map(project, result Selector), "The result Selector parameter will be removed in v8.", inner map.
throw Error(error Value), "Support for passing an error value will be removed in v8.", throw Error(() goes to new Error(.)).

Note the asymmetry in the retry When note, it is the one deprecation explicitly scheduled later than the others, because the migration is non-mechanical. Everything else in that table can be migrated on 7.8.2 today.

What the next major has already removed (landed in the 8.0.0-alpha line that became v9): the Symbol.observable export, the deprecated Subject.create static, and WebSocketSubject no longer extends Subject.
If you wrote a wrapper that subclasses WebSocketSubject or leans on Subject.create, that is the code the upgrade will break, not your operators.

In the real world: a trading U I kept a socket alive with publish Replay(1), ref Count() and had a bug nobody could reproduce: navigating from the watchlist to the detail view and back occasionally dropped the price feed for a few seconds.
ref Count() tears down when the count hits zero, and Angular destroys the old component before creating the new one, so the count really did touch zero on every navigation, a reconnect on each route change, and a visible gap whenever the reconnect was slow.
Migrating to share({ connector: () goes to new ReplaySubject(1), resetOnRefCountZero: () goes to timer(3000) }) fixed it in one line, because the grace-period notifier is exactly the missing concept.
The lesson is not "use the new A P I": it is that ref Count encodes a policy, "nobody is watching, so stop", and route transitions momentarily satisfy that policy even when the user never left.

-- pause --
The operator catalog.

Operators are functions that transform Observables. Used inside .pipe():

The most-used operators:

Filtering:
filter(predicate), keep matching values.
take(n), first N values, then complete.
take Until(notifier$), stop when notifier emits.
take While(predicate), keep while predicate is true.
skip(n), drop first N.
distinctUntilChanged(), drop consecutive duplicates.
debounce Time(milliseconds), emit only after silence of milliseconds (typing in search).
throttle Time(milliseconds), emit at most once per milliseconds window.

Transformation:
map(fn), transform each value.
scan(reducer, seed), Redux-like running accumulator (emits each step).
reduce(reducer, seed), final accumulator on complete.
pairwise(), emit [previous, current].
buffer Time(milliseconds), collect values into arrays per time window.

Combination:
combine Latest([a$, b$]), emits when ANY source emits, with the latest of each.
fork Join([a$, b$]), emits ONCE when all sources complete.
merge(a$, b$), interleaves emissions from all.
concat(a$, b$), emits a$ fully, then b$.
zip(a$, b$), pairs up values 1:1.
withLatestFrom(other$), use other$'s latest with each value of source.

Flattening (higher-order): see next section.

Side effects:
tap(fn), run side effect; pass values through. Like consoledot log without breaking the chain.

Error handling:
catch Error(fn), replace the error with a fallback Observable.
retry(n) / retry({ count: n, delay:. }), re-subscribe on error.

The ones that separate ten years from three, because they only show up once you have hit the problem they solve:

finalize(fn), runs on complete, error and unsubscribe. The only correct place to clear a loading flag, because catch Error misses cancellation and complete misses errors.
timeout({ each: 10_000 }), errors with TimeoutError if the gap between emissions exceeds the budget. The missing half of every retry policy: without it, a request that hangs forever never reaches your retry.
defaultIfEmpty(x), the antidote to a filtered stream that completes empty and silently produces nothing downstream (and to EmptyError from firstValueFrom ).
group By(key Fn) + merge Map, per-key sequencing. concat Map globally serialises; group By(o goes to o.customer Id), merge Map(g goes to g.pipe(concat Map(save))) serialises per customer and runs customers in parallel. This is the answer to "how do you keep order without giving up throughput".
merge Map(project, concurrency), the second parameter is a concurrency cap. merge Map(upload, 3) is a three-lane queue; merge Map(x, 1) is concat Map.
audit / audit Time and sample / sample Time, "latest value, on my clock" rather than "every value" or "the first one".
start With / pairwise / distinctUntilKeyChanged, the small ones that remove a surprising amount of stateful component code.
EMPTY, NEVER, of(), defer(() goes to. ), defer in particular: it re-evaluates its factory per subscription, which is how you make an Observable that reads a current token or timestamp instead of the one that existed when the pipeline was built.

-- pause --
Higher-order mapping, switch Map, merge Map, concat Map, exhaust Map.

These four are the most-asked RxJS interview question. Each handles "I have an Observable; for each value, I want to call another async function."

switch Map, Cancel any in-flight inner; start new, Search-as-you-type, latest-wins.
merge Map ( flat Map ), Run all inners in parallel, Independent operations, fan-out.
concat Map, Queue inner; run sequentially, Order-sensitive operations.
exhaust Map, Ignore new outer values until inner completes, Login button, prevent double-submit.

The mental model: outer Observable emits implies for each value, project to inner Observable implies flatten to a single output stream. The four operators differ in how they handle concurrent inners.

-- pause --
Choose by failure mode, not by definition.

Anyone can recite the four definitions. What an interviewer is actually probing is whether you pick them from the symptom, because that is how the choice arrives in real work, as a bug report, not as a design question.

"Search results flicker and sometimes show the wrong list", Slow response for "ma" lands after the fast one for "mars", switch Map, kill the stale request.
"The customer was charged twice" / "two orders with the same lines", Double-clicked submit; two POSTs in flight, exhaust Map, ignore clicks while one is running.
"The audit log shows the edits out of order" / "last-write-wins picked the wrong write", Parallel PATCHes resolved by arrival time, concat Map, queue them.
"We hammered the downstream A P I and got 429 seconds", Unbounded fan-out, merge Map(fn, n), cap the lanes.
"Order is only required per customer, and the queue is too slow", Global serialisation used where per-key would do, group By + concat Map inside merge Map.

The one-line versions worth memorising: switch Map for reads, exhaust Map for writes, concat Map when order is load-bearing, merge Map when nothing about order or duplication matters. The default should be switch Map for GETs and exhaust Map for anything that mutates.

-- pause --
Why switch Map on a POST is a bug.

switch Map cancels the inner subscription when a new outer value arrives. For a GET that is exactly right, you no longer want the answer. For a POST it is the wrong mental model twice over:

You cancel your knowledge of the write, not the write. Unsubscribing aborts the client's side of the request. The server has already received the bytes; if the handler is past the point of no return, the order is created, the payment is captured, the email is queued.
What you discarded is the response, including the id of the thing you just created.
The retry then duplicates it. Because the caller saw "cancelled", the U I shows an error or an idle button, the user clicks again, and now there are two.

The fix is a pair, not a single operator. On the client, exhaust Map (plus a disabled button bound to a loading signal). On the server, an idempotency key the client generates once per user intent and sends as a header, so a genuine duplicate is recognised and answered with the original result.
In dot NET, that is typically a de-duplication table or a distributed-cache entry keyed on that header inside the command handler, and it is the answer interviewers want when they ask "what if the client retries anyway?"

-- pause --
What unsubscribe actually cancels.

This is where the Angular and dot NET halves of the interview meet.

In the browser (Angular v22 and later): HttpClient uses the fetch backend by default.
The v22 release notes deprecate with Fetch() with "it can be safely removed", and flag the corresponding breaking change: use provideHttpClient(with Xhr()) if you still need upload-progress reports, which the fetch backend does not provide.
The fetch backend creates an AbortController per request and calls abort() in the Observable's teardown, so unsubscribing genuinely aborts the in-flight request. On the older XHR backend the teardown calls xhr.abort(), same observable behaviour, different plumbing.
On the wire: an aborted fetch closes the request stream. Whether the server ever notices depends on how far it got.
In A S P dot NET Core: it can notice. A CancellationToken parameter on a controller action or minimal-A P I handler is bound to HttpContext.RequestAborted, which fires when the client disconnects.
If you pass that token down into E F Core and HttpClient calls, an abandoned request stops doing work; if you ignore it (the common case), the handler runs to completion and commits, and the client-side "cancellation" was cosmetic.

So the honest interview answer to "does switch Map cancel the server call?" is: it cancels the browser's request and surfaces as RequestAborted on the server; whether that stops the work depends entirely on whether the dot NET handler threads the cancellation token through.
Which is why you do not use it for writes.

In the real world: an internal ops tool let staff reassign a ticket from a dropdown, wired as selection$.pipe(switch Map(id goes to api.reassign(ticket, id))). QA found nothing.
In production, a user who picked the wrong person and immediately picked the right one produced tickets assigned to the first person about one time in twenty, the second request was faster than the first, the first landed later and won, and the cancelled-looking request had committed anyway.
The fix was two lines: exhaust Map plus disabling the control while the mutation was pending. The general form is worth stating out loud in an interview: cancellation in RxJS is a statement about what the client is still interested in, never a statement about what the server has already done.

-- pause --
Nested switch Map and cancellation cascades.

Cancellation propagates inward, never outward. In outer$.pipe(switch Map(a goes to inner$(a).pipe(switch Map(b goes to leaf$(b))))), a new outer value tears down the inner chain and every leaf it, while a new inner value tears down only the leaves.
That is exactly what a dependent-dropdown screen (country to region to city) needs, and it is also why a leaked subscription at the leaf is so hard to see:
the teardown looks automatic until someone converts one link in the chain to a manual subscribe() inside a callback, at which point the chain stops propagating and the leaves outlive the page.

-- pause --
Combination operators.

For combining multiple streams:

combine Latest is the workhorse, "I want to react when any of these change." Common in reactive forms.

-- pause --
Error handling.

Default behavior: an error in the source terminates the stream, subsequent emissions stop. Two patterns:

catch Error to recover:

retry for transient failures:

retry also takes resetOnSuccess (default false ): with it set, the counter resets whenever the resubscribed source emits a value, which is what you want for a long-lived stream that reconnects, three failures in a row should fail, three failures over a day should not.

Catching to keep the stream alive in higher-order:

If the catch Error were on the outer, one search failure would kill the search stream forever. Catch close to the source.

-- pause --
An unhandled error terminates the stream permanently.

This is the single most consequential fact about RxJS error handling, and the one that produces the "the page just stops working until you refresh" bug class. error is a terminal notification, exactly like complete. Once it fires:

no further values are delivered, ever, on that subscription;
the teardown runs (so timers, sockets and requests are cleaned up, the stream is not leaking, it is gone);
the source is not re-subscribed. There is no automatic recovery.

The pathological case is a long-lived stream that feeds the U I, form value Changes piped into a save pipeline, a router-events pipeline, a websocket, a polling loop. One failed inner request without a catch Error and the whole feature is silently inert for the rest of the session.
The user's report will be "the save button stopped doing anything", and nothing in the console after the first error.

Where the error goes if you never catch it depends on how you subscribed:

.subscribe({ next }) with no error callback, RxJS reports it as an unhandled error, asynchronously, via config.onUnhandledError (default: rethrow on a fresh call stack, so it surfaces as a global window.onerror, not at your subscribe site).
async pipe, the error is routed to Angular's application ErrorHandler. The binding keeps its last value and the subscription is finished; the pipe does not quietly render null and carry on.
to Signal, the error is stored and rethrown every time the signal is read, which means it surfaces during template evaluation, at the consumer, not at the subscription.
firstValueFrom / lastValueFrom, a rejected Promise, so try / catch around your await works normally.

-- pause --
Placement: inside the inner pipe, or outside?.

The rule is mechanical once you see it as "which stream do I want to survive?":

Both compile, both pass the happy-path test, and only one of them survives a 500. Two refinements a senior is expected to add:

catch Error must return an Observable or rethrow. To rethrow, use the factory form: catch Error(err goes to throw Error(() goes to err)), passing the value directly ( throw Error(err) ) is deprecated in RxJS 7.
Do not let the fallback lie about its shape. catch Error(() goes to of([])) on a search is honest (no results).
catch Error(() goes to of(null)) on a "load user" stream pushes null into code that has been told it has a User, and the failure resurfaces three components away as a property access on null.
Prefer a discriminated result ( { status: 'error', error } ) whenever the consumer needs to distinguish empty from broken, and note that http Resource / rx Resource give you that distinction for free via status() and error().

-- pause --
A retry policy that survives review.

Four things that are load-bearing and usually missing: a timeout (a request that never answers is never retried), a retriable-status filter (retrying a 400 three times is three guaranteed failures plus 3 times the latency before the user sees the error), jitter (without it,
every client that failed during the same outage retries in lockstep and re-creates the outage the moment the service comes back, the thundering-herd problem your dot NET side knows from Polly), and finalize rather than a complete handler, because cancellation is not completion.

In the real world: a team added retry({ count: 3, delay: 1000 }) to a shared H T T P interceptor after a flaky-network sprint. Two months later a bad deploy started returning 401 seconds from one endpoint.
Every client turned each 401 into four requests, the auth service saturated, and the incident channel filled with "the login service is down", the retry policy had turned a small failure into a self-inflicted load test,
and the actual fault (an expired signing key) took an extra forty minutes to find under the noise.
The retry was reinstated with a status filter and jitter. The generalisable line: a retry without a predicate is an amplifier, and the thing it amplifies most reliably is your own outage.

-- pause --
Promise interop, to Promise, firstValueFrom, lastValueFrom.

to Promise() is deprecated in RxJS 7 with the note "Replaced with firstValueFrom and lastValueFrom. Will be removed in v8", that is in the next major. The reason it had to go is a design flaw, not a style preference, and the flaw is the interview question:

to Promise resolves with the last value the source emitted, and with undefined if the source completed without emitting anything. Those two outcomes are indistinguishable when T itself can be undefined, and the undefined case is silent, the caller carries on with a value that never existed.
The typings say Promise for every source, which is why every to Promise() call site in a strict codebase either has a! on it or a defensive if.

The v7 replacements are explicit about both dimensions, which value, and what happens on empty:

firstValueFrom(source$), the first emission, rejects with EmptyError, immediately after the first value.
lastValueFrom(source$), the last emission, on complete, rejects with EmptyError, on complete.
firstValueFrom(source$, { default Value: x }), first emission, else x, resolves with x,.
lastValueFrom(source$, { default Value: x }), last emission, else x, resolves with x,.

Consequences worth stating precisely:

firstValueFrom cancels. It unsubscribes as soon as it has a value, which on an H T T P call is harmless (the response has arrived) but on a hot stream means the rest of the stream is never observed.
That is the intended semantic, and it is what makes firstValueFrom the right bridge for one-shot requests.
lastValueFrom on an infinite source never settles. No EmptyError, no timeout, no warning, just a Promise that hangs, and an await that never returns. Pair it with take(n), take Until, or timeout.
EmptyError is a feature. firstValueFrom(this http get(.)) on an endpoint returning 204 No Content rejects rather than silently handing you undefined, which is exactly the distinction to Promise could not make.
In Angular, prefer staying in Observables at the boundary, guards, resolvers, interceptors and HttpClient all accept them, and convert with firstValueFrom only where you genuinely want async / await ergonomics (test setup, a sequential script, an APP_INITIALIZER -style bootstrap step).

For a dot NET reader, the sharpest contrast: await some Task does not cancel the work if the awaiting code goes away, whereas unsubscribing from an Observable does tear it down. firstValueFrom is where you give that up, once it is a Promise, cancellation is no longer part of the contract.

-- pause --
Memory leak prevention.

Subscriptions hold references. Forgotten subscriptions leak memory and trigger phantom callbacks. Three solutions:

1. async pipe (preferred when possible):

Angular subscribes when the template renders, unsubscribes when the component is destroyed. No manual cleanup.

2. takeUntilDestroyed() (shipped in Angular v16 with @angular or core or rxjs-interop; promoted to stable in v19):

The cleanest manual approach. Auto-completes the stream when the component is destroyed.

3. Manual Subject notifier (legacy pattern):

Common in older codebases; avoid in new code.

-- pause --
Every way a subscription actually leaks.

"Leak" is used loosely. Precisely: a subscription keeps a reference to its observer, the observer closes over the component, and the component keeps its D I graph, its DOM references and its child components alive. So the leak is not the stream, it is everything the callback can see.
The shapes, in rough order of how often they show up in a heap snapshot:

.subscribe() in ngOnInit with no teardown, on a source that never completes ( interval, a socket, a BehaviorSubject in a root service, router.events, form.value Changes ). The canonical case.
Nested subscribe. The inner subscription is not owned by the outer one, cleaning up the outer leaves the inner running. Flatten instead.
Subscribing to a root-scoped Subject from many components. The Subject's subscriber list is the leak; it lives as long as the app. takeUntilDestroyed fixes the consumer side, but nothing fixes it if the components never unregister.
share Replay({ ref Count: false }) over an infinite source, a permanent subscription by construction (see the cold or hot section).
to Observable() or to Signal() created outside a destroyable injection context, or with manual Cleanup: true on a source that never completes. manual Cleanup means exactly what it says: you own it now.
from Event(window,. ) / from Event(document,. ) in a component. The listener outlives the component along with everything the handler closes over.
take Until placed anywhere but last. Operators that resubscribe ( retry, repeat ) re-establish the upstream subscription your teardown gate, so the gate stops applying. This is what the ESLint rule no-unsafe-takeuntil exists to catch.
A pending request after destroy. Not permanent, but real: the component stays reachable until the response arrives or the request aborts. take(1) does not help if the source never emits; takeUntilDestroyed() does, because destruction, not emission, is the trigger.

The systematic fix is not vigilance, it is removing the manual subscribe from components entirely: async pipe or to Signal for anything the template reads, takeUntilDestroyed() for genuine side effects, and a lint rule so the exceptions have to be argued in review.

-- pause --
takeUntilDestroyed, the mechanism, and its two sharp edges.

It is a thin wrapper: it injects DestroyRef, builds an Observable that emits when DestroyRef.on Destroy fires, and pipes your source through take Until of that. Which explains both edges:

Edge one, injection context. Called with no argument, takeUntilDestroyed() asserts it is running in an injection context (constructor, field initializer, factory, or inside runInInjectionContext ). Outside one it throws NG0203 ("can only be used within an injection context. "), not a warning.
The explicit takeUntilDestroyed(this.destroy Ref) overload exists precisely so you can use it in a method.
Edge two, it completes, it does not error. take Until completes the stream, so your complete handler runs on destroy and your error handler does not.
Also, if the DestroyRef has already been destroyed when you call it, the notifier emits synchronously and the source is never subscribed at all, a subtle but useful behaviour when you are handing observables around late in a component's life.

For services, the rule follows from ownership: a component-provided service gets the component's DestroyRef and behaves as you would expect; a provided In: 'root' service is destroyed only when the application is, so takeUntilDestroyed() there is a no-op dressed as cleanup.

-- pause --
What the async pipe actually does.

Worth knowing exactly, because "just use the async pipe" is advice, not an explanation:

it subscribes on first transform() and unsubscribes in ngOnDestroy, the pipe instance is owned by the view;
on each emission it stores the value and calls markForCheck(), which is what makes it work under OnPush (and under v22's OnPush-by-default);
the subscription is created inside untracked(.), so signal reads that happen as a side effect of subscribing are not captured as template dependencies;
errors are routed to the application's ErrorHandler;
each | async in the template is its own subscription. {{ (user$ | async)?.name }} twice means two subscriptions and, on a cold H T T P source, two requests. Bind once with @if (user$ | async; as user).

In the real world: a team chased a memory report for two sprints, the JS heap climbing steadily across an hour of normal use, never coming back down, and kept finding "correctly unsubscribed" components.
The actual retainer was a provided In: 'root' notifications service whose Subject had accumulated one subscriber per visit to a dialog that never unsubscribed, each closure holding the dialog's component instance and its rendered rows. takeUntilDestroyed() in the dialog fixed it in one line.
What made it expensive was the diagnosis, and the diagnosis was a habit rather than a tool: take a heap snapshot, filter by your component's class name, and look at the retaining path, the path names the leak in seconds, and every leak shows up as a chain that ends at a subscriber list.

-- pause --
Marble testing with TestScheduler.

Marble testing is how you assert on time without waiting for it. TestScheduler from rxjs or testing runs your pipeline in virtual time, so a 300 milliseconds debounce and a 30 seconds backoff both resolve instantly and deterministically.

(That test is exact, the frame arithmetic is what RxJS 7.8.2 actually produces, including the fact that the outer | at 1302 is what completes the result, not the inner completion at 1202.)

What run() changes. Inside test Scheduler.run(callback):

one marble frame ( - ) is 1 virtual millisecond; outside run() the legacy frameTimeFactor of 10 applies, which is why old marble tests read so strangely;
max Frames is lifted (750 by default outside run() ), so long backoffs are testable;
RxJS's internal timer providers, set Interval, set Timeout, set Immediate, requestAnimationFrame, Date.now, performance.now, are delegated to the scheduler, so delay, debounce Time, timer, interval, audit Time all use virtual time without being passed a scheduler;
the scheduler flushes automatically when your callback returns, which is when the assertions actually execute. Anything you assert with a plain expect inside the callback runs before the flush and will see pre-flush state.

Reading the syntax fluently (this is the part interviewers test by writing a marble on a whiteboard and asking what it means):

-, maps to, one frame of virtual time (1 millisecond inside run() ).
a, z, 0, 9, maps to, a next() of the value mapped in the values object.
\, maps to, complete().
#, maps to, error().
the subscription point, hot observables only; frames before it are negative time.
(abc), maps to, those notifications occur synchronously in the same frame; time then advances by the length of the group including the parentheses.
100 milliseconds, 1.5 seconds, 2m, maps to, time-progression syntax, only valid inside run(), and needs a space around it unless it starts the diagram.
whitespace, maps to, ignored; use it to vertically align diagrams.

Two gotchas that will bite the first time:

An emission character consumes a frame of its own. 'a 10 milliseconds b' is not "b at 10 milliseconds", the a advances time by 1, so you usually write 'a 9 milliseconds b' to land on 10. The docs call this out explicitly and it is the most common reason a marble test is off by one.
Promises are not virtualised. TestScheduler delegates RxJS's scheduler providers, not the microtask queue.
Anything that goes through a Promise, from(promise), async / await in your code under test, fetch, an Angular HttpClient call that has not been mocked at the Observable level, will not respect virtual time. That, not "CI is slower", is the actual reason marble tests turn flaky.

The assertion that earns its place is expect Subscriptions.
expect Observable proves what came out; expect Subscriptions proves when the inner source was subscribed and unsubscribed, which is the only direct way to test that switch Map cancelled, that exhaust Map ignored, or that takeUntilDestroyed tore down.
"How would you prove your cancellation logic works?" is a standard senior follow-up, and expect Subscriptions(inner.subscriptions).to Be([.]), one marble string per subscription, with for subscribe and! for unsubscribe, is the answer.

Where marble tests do not belong. Testing an Angular component's rendered output through marbles is usually the wrong layer, fake Async / tick() or the harness A P Is read better there, and mixing TestScheduler with fake Async or a framework's fake timers gives you two competing clocks.
Keep marbles for the pure pipeline: a custom operator, a service method that composes streams, an NgRx effect.
The Angular C L I's default test runner is Vitest as of v21, but nothing changes with the runner, TestScheduler brings its own clock and does not depend on Jasmine, Jest or Vitest timer mocks.

In the real world: a team's auto-save pipeline ( debounce Time(2000) to switch Map to save) had a test that passed for a year and a bug that never went away: rapid edits occasionally saved an older document body.
The test used fake Async + tick(2000) and asserted the final H T T P call, so it verified the debounce and said nothing about the first request being cancelled.
Rewritten with expect Subscriptions, it failed on the first run, someone had changed switch Map to merge Map months earlier to "fix a dropped save", and the two saves were racing. Test the cancellation, not just the last value; a test that only asserts the final emission cannot see a race.

-- pause --
RxJS in the signals era.

Signals replace many BehaviorSubject use cases. RxJS is still indispensable for streams over time (events, websocket, debounced search, polling, complex async chains). The two coexist via interop helpers:

Modern guidance:
Pure state to signal.
Streams of events / async sequences to Observable.
HttpClient one-shot to Observable + firstValueFrom or to Signal.
Complex async pipelines to Observable; convert to signal at the end.

-- pause --
to Signal, the whole contract.

Stability: shipped in v16 (developer preview), stable in v20. The full options object as of v22:

The behaviours that decide whether your code is correct:

It subscribes immediately, at the call site. Not lazily on first read.
So to Signal on a cold H T T P Observable fires the request when the field initializer runs, not when the template first reads it, that is a real difference from | async, which subscribes when the view renders and re-subscribes if the view is destroyed and recreated.
Without initial Value and without require Sync, the type is Signal and the value is undefined until the first emission. Not "the last value", not a loading sentinel, undefined.
Every template that reads it needs to handle that state, which is exactly why so many codebases pass { initial Value: [] } reflexively and then cannot distinguish "loading" from "no results".
require Sync: true removes the undefined from the type by asserting the source emits synchronously on subscribe. If it does not, Angular throws NG0601, " to Signal() called with require Sync but Observable did not emit synchronously", at creation time.
Correct for a BehaviorSubject, a start With(.) pipeline, or a ReplaySubject(1) that has already emitted. Never correct for HttpClient: an H T T P Observable is asynchronous by definition, so require Sync on it throws every single time.
Errors are rethrown at read. The subscription's error is stored and thrown by the signal's getter, so it surfaces during template evaluation, at whatever consumer happens to read it, potentially far from the pipeline that failed.
Catch inside the pipeline; do not rely on the signal to carry a failure gracefully. (The old reject Errors option was removed in v20 on the grounds that it "encourages uncaught exceptions", it is not an option you can reach for.)
Completion is a non-event. Signals have no notion of complete; the signal simply keeps returning the last value it saw.
Cleanup follows the injection context. It takes DestroyRef from the current context (or the injector you pass) and unsubscribes on destroy. With manual Cleanup: true there is no teardown at all, only safe for sources that complete on their own.
It must not be called inside a reactive context. Calling to Signal inside a computed / effect throws in dev mode, because it would create a new subscription on every recomputation. This is the trap when someone "moves it closer to where it is used".

-- pause --
to Observable, an effect in disguise.

Also stable since v20. Its implementation is three lines and explains every question you will be asked about it: a ReplaySubject(1) fed by an effect that reads the signal, completed when the injection context is destroyed.

That means:

it emits the latest value on subscribe (ReplaySubject semantics), so it behaves like a BehaviorSubject, not like a plain Subject;
it emits when the signal stabilises, not on every write. Five synchronous set() calls in one turn produce one emission of the final value.
If you need every intermediate value, an analytics trail, an undo stack, a pairwise() diff, a signal was the wrong carrier and to Observable will not recover the history that was never there;
it completes on destroy, which makes downstream take Until / finalize behave sanely;
it needs an injection context (or an explicit injector ), because it creates an effect.

In the real world: a team moved a filter panel from a BehaviorSubject to a signal and kept the analytics pipeline by wrapping it in to Observable(filters).pipe(pairwise(), map(diff)). The events went from a few hundred a day to a handful.
Nothing was broken in the RxJS sense:
their apply Preset() set four signals in a row, and where the old code had emitted four times, the effect-backed Observable coalesced them into one emission of the final state, so "user changed date range" and "user changed status" disappeared into a single combined event.
They moved the analytics call to the place the intent lived (the preset handler) instead of inferring it from state transitions. to Observable is a view of a value over time, not a log of the writes that produced it.

-- pause --
rx Resource, the v22 shape (and what changed since v19).

resource(), rx Resource() and http Resource() were promoted from experimental to stable in v22 (merged May 2026, released 3 June 2026). Their shape changed twice on the way there, which is exactly the kind of detail an interviewer uses to date your knowledge:

v19.0, @experimental, request, loader (returns an Observable).
v19.2, @experimental ( http Resource added), request, loader.
v20, v21, still @experimental, the tag is in the source, params, stream.
v22, stable (angular.dev says "stable since v22.0"), params, stream.

What it buys you over a hand-rolled to Signal(pipeline), and what it costs:

Cancellation is built in. When params changes or the resource is destroyed, the abort Signal fires and rx Resource unsubscribes from your Observable, switch Map semantics, without the pipeline.
Status is first-class. status() / is Loading() / error() / has Value() replace the three parallel signals every team writes by hand, and error() means you no longer have to smuggle failures through the value type.
An Observable that completes without emitting is an error, not an empty state: the resource fails with "Resource completed before producing a value". So stream: () goes to EMPTY, or a stream whose only value is filtered out, does not leave the resource pending, it errors.
Worth knowing before you pipe filter(.) into one.
It is not a pipeline. There is no debounce, no retry, no ordering guarantee across params changes other than last-wins. Compose that inside stream, or keep the pipeline in RxJS and convert with to Signal at the end. Choosing between the two is a real design decision, not a migration to be completed.

-- pause --
debounced(), signals grew a clock in v22 (experimental).

Mark this as experimental if you bring it up, angular.dev labels debounced() Experimental, available from v22.0. Say "stable" about it in an interview and you have handed the interviewer a correction.
The shape: debounced(source, wait, options?), where wait is a number of milliseconds or a function returning a Promise (a custom timer), and the return value is a Resource, so you read .value() and can inspect .is Loading():

This is a genuine narrowing of RxJS's territory: the "debounce a value, then load" case, which was the poster child for debounce Time + switch Map, is now expressible in signals end to end, with cancellation supplied by the resource.
What it still does not give you: retry with backoff, ordering across requests, merging several event sources, exhaust Map -style ignore-while-busy, buffering, or anything driven by an event that is not a value (a click, a socket frame, a router navigation).
Answer the "do signals replace RxJS?" question with that boundary, not with a slogan.

-- pause --
So: when do you still reach for RxJS?.

the trigger is an event, not a value, maps to, clicks, keystrokes, socket frames, router.events, value Changes, signals have no notion of "it happened again with the same value".
you need cancellation of in-flight work beyond a resource's last-wins, maps to, switch Map, exhaust Map, take Until.
time is part of the requirement, maps to, debounce or throttle or audit or buffer or interval or timeout, the experimental debounced() covers one case of many.
you need retry, backoff, jitter, timeout, maps to, retry({ delay }) + timeout have no signal equivalent.
order is load-bearing, maps to, concat Map, group By.
several sources must be coordinated, maps to, combine Latest, merge, race, zip, withLatestFrom.
the producer pushes, maps to, WebSocket, S S E, BroadcastChannel, from Event.

it is current state the template reads, maps to, pull-based, glitch-free, and the template tracks it precisely.
it is derived from other state, maps to, computed() beats combine Latest(.).pipe(map(.)) for readability and for change detection.
it is async data keyed by state, maps to, resource / rx Resource / http Resource (stable in v22).
it is a component input or model, maps to, input() / model() are signals; converting them to Observables adds a hop.

The composite rule, and the one worth saying in an interview: keep the pipeline in RxJS and convert once, at the edge, with to Signal. Converting back and forth ( to Observable(to Signal(x$)) ) is a smell, it means the ownership of that piece of state was never decided.

In the real world: a fifty-component app upgraded to v22 and a third of its screens stopped updating.
Nothing in the release notes about the app's own patterns had changed, but OnPush became the default change-detection strategy in v22 for any component with an undefined change Detection property ( ChangeDetectionStrategy.Default was renamed Eager and deprecated).
Every component that had been mutating an array in place, or updating a field from inside a bare .subscribe() without markForCheck(), had been carried by Default for years and now failed.
The upgrade migration adds change Detection: ChangeDetectionStrategy.Eager where it can detect the risk,
and taking that escape hatch is the correct short-term move, but the honest interview version of this story is that the app had been depending on Angular re-checking everything on every event since v8,
and every one of those components was already broken under OnPush; the version bump only made it visible.
They fixed the top twenty by hand (async pipe or to Signal for anything read by the template, immutable updates for the rest) and left Eager on the tail.

In the real world: a team put NgRx into a five-screen internal admin app because "we'll need it when it grows". Three years later it had eleven screens, four hundred lines of actions, and a rule that every new field needed an action, a reducer case, a selector and an effect.
Half the state was server data that a resource() would now own for free, and the genuinely global state was a user profile and a feature-flag map, two signals in a service. The migration they eventually ran deleted the store for everything except one genuinely cross-cutting workflow.
The interview-usable version is not "NgRx is bad": it is that the cost of a store is paid per field, forever, and it is only worth paying where several distant features write the same state, which was one slice out of eleven.
Being able to say "we removed a state library and the design got better" is a senior sentence.

-- pause --
The dot NET seam, interceptors, token refresh, cores, SSR.

Full-stack interviews cross this boundary deliberately. Every item is an RxJS problem and an A S P dot NET Core problem, and the strong answers show both sides.

-- pause --
Functional interceptors and token attachment.

Since v15, provideHttpClient(with Interceptors([.])) takes plain functions, HttpInterceptorFn = (req, next) goes to Observable>, which can use inject() directly. Class interceptors still work via withInterceptorsFromDi(), but new code has no reason to use them.

HttpContext is the mechanism for per-request opt-outs (skip auth, skip the retry policy, skip the loading spinner) without string-matching URLs, the request carries the flag, so the interceptor stays decoupled from your routing table.

-- pause --
The refresh race, several requests 401 at once.

This is the interceptor question that separates people who have run this in production. A dashboard fires six requests on load; the access token has just expired; all six come back 401 at roughly the same moment. The naive interceptor issues six refresh calls.
On a dot NET back end that implements refresh-token rotation (the current O auth BCP recommendation), the first refresh rotates the token and invalidates the one the other five are holding, and a rotated-token reuse is, correctly, treated as a possible theft signal,
so the whole token family is revoked and every one of your users is logged out mid-session.

The fix is single-flight: one refresh, shared by everyone who needs it.

Points an interviewer will probe:

finalize rather than tap, so the gate reopens on failure and on cancellation too, otherwise one failed refresh wedges the app into a state where nothing can ever refresh again. Note its position: share Replay, so it runs once when the shared upstream tears down, not once per subscriber.
The late-401 refinement. A request that was already in flight with the old token can 401 after the refresh completed and the gate reopened, triggering a second, unnecessary refresh.
The usual guard is to capture the token the request was sent with and, on 401, retry immediately if the service's current token is already newer, refreshing only when they match.
SKIP_AUTH on the refresh call itself, or a 401 from /auth or refresh recurses forever.
Retry exactly once. Without a guard, a permanently-401 endpoint plus a working refresh gives you an infinite request loop.
switch Map here is safe because the retried request is your own replay of a request the server rejected, nothing was committed.
Distinguish 401 from 403. 401 means "your token is stale, refresh"; 403 means "you are authenticated and not allowed", and refreshing it is a pointless round trip that hides an authorisation bug.
The dot NET half: short-lived access tokens, rotation with reuse detection, and clock-skew tolerance ( ClockSkew defaults to five minutes in TokenValidationParameters, which is why a token can look valid to your A P I for minutes after the client thinks it expired).

In the real world: a team shipped refresh-on-401 without single-flighting, and it worked for a year because their dashboard made one request at a time. Then a redesign put six widgets on the landing page.
Support started seeing users logged out "randomly, only in the morning", that is, when everyone's overnight-expired token hit six parallel requests at once, six refreshes rotated over each other, and the A P I's reuse detection revoked the family.
The mitigation someone proposed first was to disable rotation on the dot NET side; the actual fix was eight lines of share Replay on the client. Concurrency the back end considers an attack is usually just a front end without a gate.

-- pause --
cores preflight is a per-request tax you can measure.

Attaching Authorization makes a request non-simple, so the browser sends an OPTIONS preflight first.
Per the cores rules a preflight is skipped only when the method is GET or HEAD or POST, the headers are limited to the cores-safelisted set ( Accept, Accept-Language, Content-Language, Content-Type, Last-Event-ID ), and Content-Type is one of application or x-www-form-urlencoded,
multipart or form-data,
text or plain.
A Jason A P I with bearer tokens fails that test on two counts, so essentially every call is preflighted.

What that costs, and how to reduce it:

One extra round trip per uncached (origin, method, header-set) combination, on a high-latency connection that is the difference between a screen that paints and a screen that waits.
Access-Control-Max-Age caches the preflight. Per MDN, the default is 5 seconds, Firefox caps it at 24 hours, and Chromium (since v76) caps it at 2 hours. In A S P dot NET Core: policy.SetPreflightMaxAge(TimeSpan.FromHours(2)).
AllowAnyOrigin() together with AllowCredentials() is not a shortcut, Microsoft's guidance is explicit that the combination is insecure and the cores service emits an invalid response, because the spec forbids * with credentials. Name your origins.
The structural fix is to stop being cross-origin: serve the SPA and the A P I from the same origin (reverse proxy, or a B F F), and the preflight question disappears along with the third-party-cookie question.

-- pause --
Why SSR breaks cookie-based auth.

Server-side rendering runs your components in Node. There is no browser, so there is no cookie jar: an HttpClient call made during SSR sends whatever headers you put on it and nothing else. with Credentials: true is a browser instruction and means nothing on the server.
So a cookie-authenticated app renders as "logged out" on the server and "logged in" after hydration, a flash of the wrong U I at best, and a duplicate round trip for everything at worst.

The mechanism to fix it: read the inbound request and forward what you are allowed to forward.

Four things to say about that code, because each is a real failure mode:

Scope the forwarding. Blindly attaching the user's session cookie to every outbound URL sends it to whatever third-party host a component happens to call.
Relative URLs do not resolve on the server. http.get('/api or orders') needs an absolute base during SSR.
The transfer cache is where SSR leaks user data. Angular serialises SSR H T T P responses into the HTML so the client does not re-fetch. By default, requests carrying Authorization, Proxy-Authorization or Cookie headers, and requests sent with credentials, are excluded.
withHttpTransferCacheOptions({ includeRequestsWithAuthHeaders: true }) turns that protection off, and the per-user payload is then embedded in a document that a C D N or a shared proxy may cache and serve to the next person. If you enable it, the page must be marked private end to end.
pendingUntilEvent() (in @angular or core or rxjs-interop, developer preview since v20) makes an Observable's first emission count towards application stability, so SSR waits for it before serialising.
Resources and HttpClient already participate via PendingTasks; a hand-rolled subscription does not, and that is why some SSR output renders a spinner forever.

-- pause --
When a chatty component tree forces a B F F.

Signals and resources make it very easy for each component to own its own data, which is good design locally and, over a real network, a screen that issues one authenticated cross-origin request per widget, each with its own preflight, its own token attachment, and its own error path.
The symptoms are recognisable: time-to-interactive dominated by request count rather than payload size, a waterfall on the network tab shaped like a staircase (because child components only mount once their parents have data), and an SSR pass that has to await all of it before it can serialise.

The backend-for-frontend answer is one endpoint per screen, shaped for that screen, composed server-side where the calls are cheap and local, and, in the O auth variant of the pattern, the B F F also holds the tokens so the browser only ever carries a same-site HttpOnly session cookie.
(The IETF's O auth 2.0 for Browser-Based Applications, an Internet-Draft with intended status Best Current Practice, describes exactly this architecture.) For a dot NET shop that is a small A S P dot NET Core project, often with YARP in front for pass-through routes,
and it collapses the preflight problem,
the token-in-JS problem and the chattiness problem into one deployment unit.

The counter-argument you should also be able to make: a B F F is another service to version, deploy, monitor and keep in sync with the screens it serves, and teams that build one per team end up with an aggregation layer that duplicates domain logic.
Reach for it when the round-trip count is the bottleneck or the token needs to leave the browser, not because the diagram looks tidier.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

-- pause --
Marble diagrams (the universal RxJS visualization).

Mental model: each operator is a transformation of the timeline of values.

-- pause --
Search-as-you-type, the canonical RxJS pattern.

Five operators, four operational concerns: pause-while-typing, deduplicate, latest-wins, error-recover. Without RxJS, this is dozens of lines of state and timer management.

-- pause --
The same typeahead, three ways (v22).

Worth being able to write all three and to say which you would pick and why, this is the most likely "code on the whiteboard" prompt for a senior Angular role in 2026.

Trade-offs to state out loud: (1) is the most testable with marbles and the most portable; (2) is the bridge you will actually write during a migration, and its cost is the effect -based coalescing in to Observable;
(3) is the least code and gives you is Loading() / error() free, but the moment you need retry-with-backoff, exhaust Map semantics, or coordination with a second stream, you are back to composing inside stream, which is (2) with extra steps.

-- pause --
Higher-order mapping illustrated.

Pick by intent. For search-as-you-type: switch Map. For "save edits in order": concat Map. For "fan out independent jobs": merge Map. For "ignore double-clicks": exhaust Map.

-- pause --
Forms + RxJS, composing form state.

The form's value Changes is an Observable, debounce, validate, persist as a single declarative pipeline.

-- pause --
Caching with share Replay.

ref Count: false keeps the cache alive even when subscribers drop to zero. ref Count: true would teardown when last unsubs.

-- pause --
Error retry with backoff.

Exponential backoff (1 second, 2 seconds, 4 seconds) with a cap and a user-facing fallback if all retries fail. The - 1 is not cosmetic: RxJS calls the delay function with the retry count, starting at 1, so 2 ** retry Count would start at two seconds.
In production add a retriable-status check and jitter, see the retry policy in Error handling.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

Not unsubscribing. Subscriptions outlive components to leaks. Use async pipe, takeUntilDestroyed, or explicit unsubscribe.
Subscribing inside subscribe (nested subscribes). Code smell. Use switch Map / merge Map / concat Map to flatten.
merge Map for everything. Concurrent inners cause race conditions. Use switch Map for "latest wins," concat Map for ordered.
Cold Observable subscribed multiple times. HttpClient.get() fires per subscribe. Use share Replay to multicast.
Calling .pipe() without subscribing. No subscription = no execution. Cold Observables only run when subscribed.
Side effects in map. map(x goes to { side Effect(); return x; }) is wrong, that's tap. Use tap for side effects, map for transformations.
catch Error at the wrong level. Catching too high terminates the outer stream forever. Catch inside switch Map to recover one inner.
Subject for app state. Use BehaviorSubject (initial value + late subscribers see current) or signals. Plain Subject loses values to late subscribers.
debounce Time without distinctUntilChanged. "abc" to "abcd" to "abc" debounce-emits "abc" twice. Add distinct.
Mutating values in operators. Operators expect immutability. Mutating arrays or objects in map causes spooky bugs.
Forgetting start With for combine Latest. combine Latest waits for ALL sources to emit at least once. With form controls or BehaviorSubjects, this is fine; with cold streams, prepend start With(initial).
Over-using RxJS. Not everything needs to be a stream. Plain Promises, signals, and arrays of values are simpler when there's no time dimension.
switch Map on a non-idempotent request. Cancelling a POST cancels your knowledge of the write, not the write. exhaust Map for submits, plus an idempotency key on the server.
retry without a predicate, a timeout or jitter. Retrying a 400 three times is three guaranteed failures; retrying a hung request never happens at all; retrying in lockstep with every other client re-creates the outage you are recovering from.
require Sync: true on an H T T P Observable. It throws NG0601 every time, H T T P is asynchronous by definition. require Sync is for BehaviorSubject s and start With pipelines.
Calling to Signal inside a computed or effect. It throws in dev mode, because it would resubscribe on every recomputation. Create it once, in a field initializer.
Expecting to Observable to emit every write. It is backed by an effect and a ReplaySubject(1), so synchronous writes coalesce into one emission.
take Until (or takeUntilDestroyed ) that isn't last in the pipe. Anything it that resubscribes, retry, repeat, re-establishes the upstream subscription beneath your teardown gate.
Multiple | async on the same source in one template. Each occurrence is its own subscription and, on a cold source, its own H T T P request. Bind once with @if (x$ | async; as x).
A catch Error fallback that lies about the shape. of(null) handed to code that was promised a User moves the failure three components away. Return an error-shaped value, or let rx Resource 's error() carry it.
Letting an error reach a state Subject. error() is terminal for the Subject itself, every future subscriber gets the error and every future next() is dropped. The feature is dead until reload.
Assuming share Replay is a cache. With the default ref Count: false it never invalidates and never unsubscribes; on an infinite source that is a permanent subscription.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Observable = lazy stream of values over time. Subscribe to run; unsubscribe to stop.
Cold = unicast (H T T P). Hot = multicast (DOM events, Subjects).
Subjects: Subject (no initial), BehaviorSubject (initial + current to late subscribers), ReplaySubject(n) (replay last N).
Operators transform via .pipe(). The big four flattening: switch Map (cancel), merge Map (parallel), concat Map (sequential), exhaust Map (ignore-while-busy).
Combination: combine Latest (any), fork Join (all complete), merge, concat, zip.
Error handling: catch Error to recover, retry with backoff for transient.
Memory safety: async pipe, takeUntilDestroyed(), explicit unsubscribe.
Modern Angular: signals for state; RxJS for streams; interop via to Signal() and to Observable().
Versions (Aug 2026): Angular v22 (3 June 2026) peer-depends on rxjs@6.5.3 || 7.4.0; stable RxJS is 7.8.2; the next major is 9.0.0-beta.0 (the v8 line was renumbered), so "will be removed in v8" means "the next major".
Stability ladder: takeUntilDestroyed stable in v19; to Signal / to Observable stable in v20; resource / rx Resource / http Resource stable in v22; pendingUntilEvent is still developer preview.
to Signal contract: subscribes immediately; undefined until first emission unless initial Value; require Sync asserts a synchronous emission or throws NG0601; errors are rethrown at read.
to Observable contract: effect + ReplaySubject(1), latest value on subscribe, one emission per stabilisation, completes on destroy.
Terminal means terminal: an unhandled error ends the stream permanently; a Subject that errors is dead for every future subscriber.
v22 defaults that change RxJS code: OnPush is the default change-detection strategy ( Default renamed Eager and deprecated), and HttpClient uses fetch by default ( with Fetch() deprecated, with Xhr() for upload progress).

Expected interview questions:

" switch Map versus merge Map versus concat Map ?", switch Map cancels previous inner on new outer (search-as-you-type). merge Map runs all in parallel (fan-out). concat Map queues sequentially (ordered saves). exhaust Map ignores new while inner running (login click).
"What's a cold versus hot Observable?", Cold: producer runs per subscription; H T T P requests are cold. Hot: shared producer; DOM events are hot. share Replay makes a cold one hot for caching.
" Subject versus BehaviorSubject versus ReplaySubject ?", Subject: no initial value, late subscribers miss old values. BehaviorSubject: has current value, late subscribers get it immediately. ReplaySubject(n): replays last N values to late subscribers.
"How do you avoid memory leaks with RxJS?", Three options: async pipe in template (auto-clean), takeUntilDestroyed() (Angular 16+), or explicit Subject + take Until + complete in ngOnDestroy.
"How do you implement search-as-you-type?", value Changes.pipe(debounce Time(300), distinctUntilChanged(), switch Map(term goes to api.search(term))). Five operators handle pause, dedup, cancel-previous, error.
"What's share Replay and when do you use it?", Multicasts a cold Observable; replays last N values to new subscribers. Use for caching A P I responses (one H T T P call, many subscribers).
"RxJS versus signals?", Signals: reactive primitives for state (current value). Observables: streams of values over time (events, async pipelines). Coexist via to Signal / to Observable. New apps: signals for state, RxJS for streams.
"With resource() stable and debounced() (experimental) in v22, when do you still reach for RxJS?", Events rather than values; cancellation semantics beyond last-wins ( exhaust Map ); retry or backoff or jitter or timeout; ordering ( concat Map, group By ); coordinating several sources;
anything that pushes (sockets, S S E).
Signals own current state, derived state and, since v22, keyed async loading.
"What does to Signal return before the Observable emits, and how do you avoid it?", undefined, and the type says so. Pass initial Value, or require Sync: true if the source is synchronous ( BehaviorSubject, start With ), the latter throws NG0601 if it is not. Never require Sync on HttpClient.
"Five requests 401 at once. What happens?", Naively, five refresh calls; with rotation on the server, the later four present an already-rotated token, reuse detection fires and the session family is revoked.
Single-flight the refresh ( share Replay + finalize to reset the gate), mark the refresh call itself to skip the interceptor, and retry the original request exactly once.
"How would you prove in a test that your typeahead cancels the stale request?", TestScheduler.run() with expect Subscriptions on the inner cold Observable: assert the first subscription's! lands before its response frame. expect Observable alone cannot see a race.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

Q: What is the difference between Observable, Subject, BehaviorSubject, and ReplaySubject?-- think --
A: Observable is a lazy unicast producer, each subscriber gets its own execution. Subject is both Observable and Observer; hot (multicast), no initial value, late subscribers miss past values.
BehaviorSubject is a Subject with a current value, late subscribers immediately receive the latest emission; use for "current state." ReplaySubject(n) buffers the last N emissions and replays them to any new subscriber regardless of when they subscribe.

Cross-Q: You use a plain Subject as an event bus. A component subscribes after the first event fires. What does it receive?-- think --
A: Nothing from before the subscription. Subject has no buffer. The component only sees events emitted after it subscribes. If the component needs the latest state, switch to BehaviorSubject. If it needs recent history (for example, last 5 messages in a chat), use ReplaySubject(5).

Cross-Q²: A service exposes a BehaviorSubject directly ( public cart$ = new BehaviorSubject([]) ). What is wrong with this, and how do you fix it?-- think --
A: External callers can call cart$.next([]), bypassing the service's validation and mutation logic. Expose cart$.as Observable() for reading, and provide explicit mutation methods ( add(), remove() ) that call next() internally. The subject itself stays private.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Cold versus hot observables.

Q: What makes an Observable cold versus hot, and why does it matter in practice?-- think --
A: Cold: the producer function runs fresh per subscriber, each subscriber gets its own execution. Every HttpClient.get() is cold; subscribing twice fires two H T T P requests. Hot: a shared producer; subscribers see the same emissions from the point they subscribe.
DOM events, WebSocket messages, and Subjects are hot, they emit regardless of subscriber count.

Cross-Q: You want multiple components to share one H T T P response. How do you turn a cold Observable hot?-- think --
A: Pipe with share Replay({ buffer Size: 1, ref Count: false }). The first subscriber triggers the H T T P call; subsequent subscribers get the cached last emission immediately.
ref Count: false keeps the cache alive when subscribers drop to zero; ref Count: true re-fetches when subscriber count drops to zero and someone subscribes again.

Cross-Q²: share Replay with ref Count: false is used to cache an auth token H T T P call. The token expires. How does the cache invalidate?-- think --
A: It doesn't automatically, share Replay with ref Count: false holds the value indefinitely.
You must either switch to ref Count: true (re-fetches on new subscription after last unsub) or build manual invalidation: hold a reference to the Observable, reset it to null on token expiry, and reassign a new http.get(.).pipe(share Replay(1)).
Alternatively, use a BehaviorSubject to hold the token and update it imperatively.

-- pause --
Drill 3, switch Map versus merge Map versus concat Map versus exhaust Map.

Q: Walk me through all four higher-order mapping operators and their use cases.-- think --
A: switch Map, on each outer emission, cancel the in-flight inner and start a new one. Use for search-as-you-type; only the latest request matters. merge Map ( flat Map ), run all inners concurrently; no cancellation. Use for independent parallel operations (track multiple clicks).
concat Map, queue inners; start the next only after the previous completes. Use for order-sensitive sequential operations (save edits). exhaust Map, ignore new outer values while an inner is running. Use for non-idempotent actions (login button, payment submit).

Cross-Q: You use merge Map for a save operation. Two saves overlap. What can go wrong?-- think --
A: Race condition, both H T T P requests are in-flight simultaneously; the server may process them out of order. The second response could overwrite the first's result, or the server could reject the concurrent write.
Use concat Map for ordered writes or exhaust Map if you want to ignore additional save triggers while one is pending.

Cross-Q²: switch Map is used for an H T T P POST (order submission). The user types quickly and triggers a cancellation. Has the cancelled request actually been cancelled on the server?-- think --
A: RxJS cancels by unsubscribing from the inner Observable, and Angular's H T T P backend tears the request down: the fetch backend, the default since v22, which is why with Fetch() is now deprecated as removable, calls abort() on its AbortController;
the XHR backend ( provideHttpClient(with Xhr()), still needed for upload progress) calls xhr.abort().
So the browser really does abandon the request.
Whether the server stops is a different question: in A S P dot NET Core a client disconnect trips HttpContext.RequestAborted, which is what a CancellationToken parameter binds to, if the handler threads that token into E F Core and downstream calls, the work stops;
if it ignores it (the common case), the write commits and you have simply thrown away the response.
Which is the whole argument for exhaust Map on writes plus a server-side idempotency key.

-- pause --
Drill 4, combine Latest versus fork Join versus zip.

Q: When do you use combine Latest, fork Join, and zip, and how do they differ in emission timing?-- think --
A: combine Latest([a$, b$]), emits whenever ANY source emits, pairing with the latest of the others. Requires all to have emitted at least once. Ideal for reactive form state, filter combinations. fork Join([a$, b$]), emits exactly once when ALL sources complete, with their last values.
Ideal for parallel H T T P calls where you need all results together. zip(a$, b$), pairs values index-for-index: first emission of A with first of B, second with second. Rarely used except for sequential pairing.

Cross-Q: combine Latest doesn't emit initially even though both sources are BehaviorSubjects. Why?-- think --
A: This shouldn't happen with BehaviorSubjects, they emit their current value synchronously on subscription, satisfying combine Latest 's "all must have emitted once" condition. If you see this, one "source" is actually a cold Observable that hasn't emitted.
Fix: start With(initial Value) on cold sources before passing to combine Latest.

Cross-Q²: You have three H T T P calls using fork Join. One fails with a 404. What happens to the other two?-- think --
A: fork Join propagates the error immediately, cancelling (unsubscribing) the remaining inner Observables. The combined Observable errors; you never get results from the other two.
To handle partial failures gracefully, wrap each inner with catch Error(err goes to of(null)) so failures produce a null value rather than terminating the join.

-- pause --
Drill 5, take Until versus takeUntilDestroyed.

Q: What is the difference between take Until and takeUntilDestroyed for subscription cleanup?-- think --
A: take Until(notifier$) is a generic operator, completes the source when notifier$ emits. Used with a Subject destroyed in ngOnDestroy. Verbose: requires a destroy Subject field, next() + complete() calls.
takeUntilDestroyed() (Angular 16+, from @angular or core or rxjs-interop ) uses DestroyRef internally, automatically completes when the injection context (component, directive) is destroyed. Cleaner; no boilerplate.

Cross-Q: takeUntilDestroyed() is called inside ngOnInit rather than in the constructor. What happens?-- think --
A: It throws, this is not a warning.
With no argument, takeUntilDestroyed() calls assertInInjectionContext and then inject(DestroyRef); ngOnInit is a lifecycle hook, not an injection context, so you get NG0203:
"takeUntilDestroyed() can only be used within an injection context such as a constructor, a factory function, a field initializer, or a function used with runInInjectionContext ".
The two correct shapes are (a) call it in a field initializer or the constructor, or (b) capture private destroy Ref = inject(DestroyRef) as a field and call takeUntilDestroyed(this.destroy Ref) wherever you like.
Also worth knowing: if the DestroyRef has already been destroyed, the notifier emits synchronously and the source is never subscribed at all.

Cross-Q²: You have a subscription in a service (not a component). Can takeUntilDestroyed be used there?-- think --
A: Yes if the service is provided at component level ( providers: [MyService] on the component). The DestroyRef it captures is the component's, the subscription completes when the component is destroyed.
For provided In: 'root' services (app lifetime), takeUntilDestroyed is meaningless since the service is never destroyed. Use first(), take(1), or explicit unsubscribe() for one-shot operations in root services.

-- pause --
Drill 6, debounce Time versus throttle Time versus audit Time.

Q: What is the difference between debounce Time, throttle Time, and audit Time?-- think --
A: debounce Time(milliseconds), waits for milliseconds silence; emits the last value after no new values for milliseconds. Resets timer on each emission. Use for search-as-you-type (emit only after user stops typing). throttle Time(milliseconds), emits immediately, then silences for milliseconds.
Use for rate-limiting scroll or resize events (emit first, ignore flood). audit Time(milliseconds), waits milliseconds after the first emission in a window, then emits the latest. Similar to throttle but emits at the END of the window with the most recent value.

Cross-Q: A user types "hello world", 11 keystrokes in 500 milliseconds. debounce Time(300) is applied. How many emissions reach the downstream operator?-- think --
A: One, the value "hello world" emitted 300 milliseconds after the last keystroke. Each keystroke resets the timer. The first 10 keystrokes are discarded because new values arrive before the timer fires.

Cross-Q²: You use throttle Time(1000) for a scroll handler that updates a sticky header's position. The user scrolls quickly for 3 seconds, then stops. The header's final position is wrong. Why?-- think --
A: throttle Time (default leading set to true, trailing set to false) emits at the start of each window and discards all trailing values. The last scroll position after the user stops may never emit if it falls in a silent window.
Fix: throttle Time(1000, async Scheduler, { leading: true, trailing: true }) to also emit the final value after the window ends, or use audit Time(100) for a "emit latest every 100 milliseconds" pattern.

-- pause --
Drill 7, share versus share Replay.

Q: What is the difference between share and share Replay?-- think --
A: share() is the RxJS 7 replacement for the old multicast(() goes to new Subject()), ref Count() pairing, and it is fully configurable:
connector (default () goes to new Subject() ), resetOnError, resetOnComplete and resetOnRefCountZero, all defaulting to true and all able to take a notifier factory instead of a boolean.
It multicasts to active subscribers; if all unsubscribe and a new one subscribes later, the source is re-subscribed from scratch (no replay).
share Replay(n) is literally share with a ReplaySubject(n) connector plus resetOnError: true, resetOnComplete: false and resetOnRefCountZero: ref Count, which is why a completed source keeps replaying forever while a failed one goes cold and lets the next subscriber retry.
Use share for hot streams where late subscribers don't need history; share Replay(1) to de-duplicate concurrent subscribers to an H T T P call.

Cross-Q: share Replay({ buffer Size: 1, ref Count: true }) versus share Replay(1), what is the difference?-- think --
A: share Replay(1) is equivalent to share Replay({ buffer Size: 1, ref Count: false }). With ref Count: false, the source stays subscribed even when all subscribers unsubscribe, the cache is kept forever.
With ref Count: true, the source is torn down when subscriber count drops to zero; the next subscription re-triggers the source. Prefer ref Count: true to avoid dangling subscriptions and stale caches.

Cross-Q²: Two components subscribe to the same share Replay(1) H T T P Observable. Both unsubscribe (user navigates away). A third component later subscribes. Does it get the cached value or re-fetch?-- think --
A: With ref Count: false, gets the cached value, no re-fetch. With ref Count: true, the source was torn down when the second subscriber left; the third subscription re-triggers the H T T P call. Choose based on whether staleness or extra H T T P calls are the greater concern.

-- pause --
Drill 8, catch Error versus retry versus retry When.

Q: What is the difference between catch Error, retry, and retry When in error handling?-- think --
A: catch Error(fn), intercepts the error and replaces the stream with a fallback Observable (or re-throws). The original stream is terminated; downstream receives the fallback's emissions instead.
retry(n), resubscribes to the source Observable on error, up to n times; useful for transient network failures.
retry When, custom retry logic driven by a notifier Observable; deprecated, with the source note saying it will be removed "in v9 or v10", and replaced by the retry({ count, delay, resetOnSuccess }) config that landed in RxJS 7.3. Note the delay callback is invoked with a 1-based retry count.

Cross-Q: Where you place catch Error matters critically. Explain the difference between catching at the outer versus inner level in a switch Map chain.-- think --
A: Outer catch: search Term$.pipe(switch Map(t goes to api.search(t)), catch Error(err goes to of([]))), the first search failure terminates the entire search stream; no further searches are possible.
Inner catch: search Term$.pipe(switch Map(t goes to api.search(t).pipe(catch Error(err goes to of([]))))), each search error is isolated; the outer stream continues; subsequent searches still work. Always catch errors at the innermost level when the outer stream must survive.

Cross-Q²: retry({ count: 3 }) retries 3 times and then errors. The caller doesn't catch the error. What happens in Angular?-- think --
A: The error propagates to the subscriber's error callback. If there is none, RxJS reports it through config.onUnhandledError, which by default rethrows on a fresh call stack, so it surfaces as a global error, not at your subscribe() line.
The Observable is terminated: no more values, no complete, and the teardown has already run.
What happens in a template depends on the bridge: the async pipe routes the error to Angular's application ErrorHandler and keeps rendering its last value (it does not silently swap in undefined ), while to Signal stores the error and rethrows it every time the signal is read,
so it detonates during template evaluation at whichever consumer reads it.
Either way the stream is finished. Always pair retry with a terminal catch Error, and prefer an error-shaped value (or rx Resource 's error() ) over a fallback that pretends the call succeeded.

-- pause --
Drill 9, Marble testing with TestScheduler.

Q: What is marble testing and what problem does TestScheduler solve?-- think --
A: Marble testing lets you write RxJS tests using ASCII timeline strings (marbles) to describe Observable behavior over virtual time.
TestScheduler from rxjs or testing controls time, debounce Time, delay, timer all respect virtual time, so you can test time-based operators synchronously without real set Timeout waits.

Cross-Q: Write the marble syntax for testing that debounce Time(300) on input "abc" (three quick emissions, one after 400 milliseconds silence) emits exactly once.-- think --
A: Inside run() you do not pass the scheduler to the operator, debounce Time(300) picks up virtual time automatically, because run() delegates RxJS's internal timer providers. The test is:

typescript.
scheduler.run(({ cold, expect Observable }) goes to {.
const source = cold('abc 400 milliseconds |'); // a@0, b@1, c@2, complete@403.
expect Observable(source.pipe(debounce Time(300))).to Be('302 milliseconds c 100 milliseconds |');
});

Read the expectation out loud: nothing for 302 frames, then c, then the source's completion at 403. Only c survives because each of a and b reset the timer one frame later.
Note the frame arithmetic that trips everyone up, an emission character advances time by one frame itself, so c at frame 2 debounces to 302, not 300.

Cross-Q²: A marble test passes locally but fails in CI where the C P U is slower. What is the cause and fix?-- think --
A: Wall-clock speed cannot affect a TestScheduler.run() test, virtual time is deterministic and the whole block runs synchronously. So the failure means something in the test is not on virtual time.
run() delegates RxJS's own providers ( set Timeout, set Interval, set Immediate, requestAnimationFrame, Date.now, performance.now ), it does not virtualise the microtask queue.
Anything that goes through a Promise escapes: from(promise), an async function inside the code under test, a real fetch, an un-mocked HttpClient.
The fix is to keep the unit under test Observable-all-the-way (mock at the Observable boundary, not the Promise boundary) and to test Promise-based code with async / await instead.
A second, less common cause: mixing TestScheduler with fake Async / tick or a framework's fake timers, which gives you two clocks fighting over the same callbacks.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Scheduler types.

Q: What are RxJS schedulers and when would you use async Scheduler versus queue Scheduler versus animationFrameScheduler?-- think --
A: Schedulers control when Observable emissions and operator callbacks are executed. async Scheduler, defers work with set Timeout(fn, delay); good for non-urgent background work, avoids blocking the call stack.
queue Scheduler, executes synchronously in a queue (FIFO); used for recursion prevention in synchronous pipelines. animationFrameScheduler, schedules work via requestAnimationFrame; ideal for DOM updates that should sync with the browser paint cycle (smooth animations, canvas updates).

Cross-Q: observe On(async Scheduler) versus subscribe On(async Scheduler), what is the difference?-- think --
A: subscribe On controls on which scheduler the subscription setup runs (the producer). observe On controls on which scheduler values are delivered to the next operator or subscriber (the consumer).
For moving work off the main thread context: observe On(async Scheduler) defers downstream processing to a set Timeout. For starting a slow producer asynchronously: subscribe On(async Scheduler).

Cross-Q²: You have a scan accumulating 10,000 values emitted synchronously. The U I freezes. How do you fix it using schedulers?-- think --
A: Be careful with the framing first:
observe On(async Scheduler) does not move work off the main thread and does not reduce the work, it schedules each downstream delivery through set Interval / set Timeout, that is as macrotasks (not microtasks), so the browser can paint and handle input between them.
That converts one long block into 10,000 small ones, which fixes "the tab is frozen" but makes total wall-clock time worse and, under zone-based change detection, can trigger 10,000 change-detection passes.
The better answers in order: reshape the stream so the U I never sees 10,000 emissions ( buffer Time(16), audit Time(16), or a scan that accumulates and a separate throttled read for the template); only then consider observe On for yielding;
and if the computation is genuinely expensive rather than merely frequent, put it in a Web Worker and let the stream carry the results back.

-- pause --
Drill 11, scan versus reduce.

Q: What is the difference between scan and reduce in RxJS?-- think --
A: scan(reducer, seed), like Array.reduce but emits the accumulated value after every emission. The stream stays open; each new value triggers a new accumulated result. reduce(reducer, seed), accumulates all values and emits the final result only on complete.
If the source never completes, reduce never emits. Use scan for running totals, Redux-style state updates, and live aggregation. Use reduce for batch summarization of a finite stream.

Cross-Q: Show how scan implements a simple Redux-style state store.-- think --
A: const state$ = actions$.pipe(scan((state, action) goes to reducer(state, action), initial State), start With(initial State), share Replay(1)). Each action dispatched to actions$ triggers scan, which applies the reducer and emits the new state.
All components subscribing to state$ get current and future states. This is conceptually what NgRx does internally.

Cross-Q²: A scan accumulates items in an array. You push items but the template doesn't update because you mutated the array with push() instead of spreading. Why does this happen, and how does it relate to RxJS?-- think --
A: RxJS itself doesn't care, scan emits the same array reference you returned from the reducer. Angular's change detection (or signal comparison) checks the reference. If you push() into an existing array and return the same reference, nothing detects a change.
Always return a new array: [.acc, new Item]. This is the pure reducer contract; mutation in scan is the same bug as mutation in Redux reducers.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Higher-order observable flattening strategies.

Q: What is a higher-order Observable and why do you need a flattening operator?-- think --
A: A higher-order Observable is an Observable that emits Observables, Observable>. Without flattening, you'd have to subscribe inside a subscribe (nested subscribes, the anti-pattern).
Flattening operators ( switch Map, merge Map, concat Map, exhaust Map ) merge the inner Observables back into a single output stream. They take a projection function (outer Value) goes to Observable and handle the inner subscriptions automatically.

Cross-Q: merge All versus merge Map, what is the difference?-- think --
A: merge Map(project) is equivalent to map(project) + merge All(). merge All() operates on an already-higher-order Observable (you've already done the map ); merge Map combines both steps. Same relationship for switch Map = map + switch All, concat Map = map + concat All.
The combined form ( switch Map, et cetera) is almost always preferred, cleaner and the intent is explicit.

Cross-Q²: You nest switch Map inside switch Map. When does the inner-inner Observable get cancelled?-- think --
A: When the inner switch Map 's source emits a new value, it cancels the inner-inner Observable. When the outer switch Map 's source emits a new value, it cancels the entire inner Observable chain including its inner-inner subscriptions. Cancellation cascades inward.
This is useful for multi-level search (select category to select subcategory to fetch products): each level's new selection cancels the downstream request tree.

-- pause --
Drill 13, RxJS with Angular: async pipe versus manual subscribe.

Q: Why is the async pipe preferred over manual subscribe in Angular components?-- think --
A: async pipe subscribes when the template renders and unsubscribes when the component is destroyed, automatic lifecycle management, no memory leaks. It also calls markForCheck() on each emission, making it compatible with OnPush change detection.
Manual subscribe() requires you to hold the Subscription, call unsubscribe() in ngOnDestroy, and manually handle change detection if on OnPush. More code, more surface for mistakes.

Cross-Q: A component subscribes to an Observable in ngOnInit and updates a local field. With OnPush, the template doesn't update. Why?-- think --
A: OnPush only checks the component when inputs change, events occur, or markForCheck() / detect Changes() is called. A bare .subscribe() callback updates a field but doesn't tell Angular to check the component.
Fix: inject ChangeDetectorRef and call this.cdr.markForCheck() inside the subscribe callback, or use the async pipe which calls markForCheck() automatically.

Cross-Q²: The async pipe is used in a template with an Observable that emits frequently (WebSocket messages, ~100 or sec). Is this a performance problem, and how do you mitigate it?-- think --
A: At 100 emissions or sec, async pipe calls markForCheck() 100 times per second triggering change detection. With default CD strategy this is heavy; with OnPush it's managed at that component but still runs 100 times. Mitigate: audit Time(16) or throttle Time(16) to cap at ~60fps.
For very high-frequency streams, use observe On(animationFrameScheduler) to synchronize updates with browser paint cycles, or switch to a signal updated in a subscription, then let the template signal-track.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Memory leaks: common patterns.

Q: Name three common subscription patterns that cause memory leaks in Angular.-- think --
A: (1) ngOnInit() { this service poll$.subscribe(x goes to this.data = x); } with no ngOnDestroy unsubscribe. (2) combine Latest([a$, b$]).subscribe(.) stored in a local variable that's never unsubscribed, the component is destroyed but the subscription holds a reference to the component's closure.
(3) Using a Subject in a service as an event bus, subscribing to it in many components, and never calling complete(), subjects in root services live forever, and component callbacks leak via the subscriber list.

Cross-Q: You add ESLint rule rxjs or no-unsafe-takeuntil to the project. What does it catch?-- think --
A: (In the maintained fork the rule id is rxjs-x or no-unsafe-takeuntil, described as "disallow applying operators after take Until ".) take Until placed before other operators that can re-subscribe ( repeat, repeat When, retry, retry When ) is unsafe, after take Until fires,
the re-subscribe operators restart the upstream subscription, bypassing the take Until teardown and leaking.
The rule enforces that take Until is the last operator in the pipe before subscribe, ensuring it's the final teardown gate.

Cross-Q²: A developer argues: "I use take(1) so I don't need to unsubscribe." Is this always correct?-- think --
A: Yes for one-shot Observables that complete after take(1) (for example, H T T P calls, router events). No for long-lived sources where the component is destroyed before the first emission, take(1) is still holding a live subscription in that case.
Also no if the Observable is a BehaviorSubject that emits synchronously, take(1) completes immediately, which is correct. The edge case: if the source never emits (pending H T T P, filtered-out event), take(1) keeps the subscription open until it does.
For components, takeUntilDestroyed() is more robust than take(1) for anything that might not emit before destroy.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Custom operator creation with pipe().

Q: How do you create a custom RxJS operator using pipe()?-- think --
A: A custom operator is a function that takes an Observable and returns an Observable. The idiomatic form: const my Op = (config: Config) goes to (source$: Observable): Observable goes to source$.pipe(operatorA(), operatorB()). It's just a function returning a function, pipeable.
Usage: source$.pipe(my Op(config)). You compose existing operators internally; no need to write a new subscriber from scratch unless you need low-level control.

Cross-Q: Write a custom operator distinctUntilChangedDeep that uses deep equality instead of reference equality.-- think --
A: const distinctUntilChangedDeep = () goes to (source$: Observable) goes to source$.pipe(distinctUntilChanged((a, b) goes to Jason.stringify(a) === Jason.stringify(b))).
Use a proper deep-equality library ( fast-deep-equal ) instead of Jason.stringify for production, Jason.stringify has ordering issues and can't handle circular references. The operator is still a simple composition: distinctUntilChanged with a custom comparator.

Cross-Q²: Your custom operator needs to accumulate state across emissions (like a ring buffer of the last N values). Is composing existing operators enough or do you need to use the new Observable(subscriber goes to.) constructor?-- think --
A: Composition is enough, scan is the right primitive: const lastN = (n: number) goes to (src$: Observable) goes to src$.pipe(scan((buf, val) goes to [.buf.slice(-(n-1)), val], [] as T[])).
The new Observable constructor is only needed for truly imperative sources (wrapping a callback A P I, a DOM event, a WebSocket) or for custom teardown logic that composition can't express. For transformation operators, composition with scan or buffer Count or pairwise is almost always sufficient.

-- pause --
Drill 16, to Signal: initial Value, require Sync, and errors.

Q: What does to Signal(source$) return before the source emits, and what are your options?-- think --
A: undefined, and the type says Signal, so the template has to handle it.
Three ways out: pass initial Value (the value returned until the first emission); pass require Sync: true, which asserts the source emits synchronously on subscribe and removes undefined from the type; or accept the undefined and treat it as "not loaded yet".
Also know that to Signal subscribes immediately at the call site, not lazily on first read, so any side effect of subscribing happens when the field initializer runs.

Cross-Q: A developer writes data = to Signal(this http get('/api or data'), { require Sync: true }) to avoid the undefined. What happens?-- think --
A: It throws NG0601, " to Signal() called with require Sync but Observable did not emit synchronously", every time, at creation. An H T T P Observable cannot emit synchronously.
require Sync is for sources that are guaranteed synchronous: a BehaviorSubject, a ReplaySubject(1) that has already emitted, or any pipeline ending in start With(.).
For H T T P, use initial Value, or better, use http Resource / rx Resource so "loading" is a real state ( is Loading() ) rather than a sentinel value.

Cross-Q²: The observable behind a to Signal errors. Where does the error surface, and how do you handle it?-- think --
A: The error is stored and rethrown from the signal's getter, so it is thrown wherever the signal is read, typically during template evaluation, in a component that may be far away from the pipeline that failed.
There is no error callback to attach and no reject Errors option (it was removed in v20 for encouraging uncaught exceptions).
Handle it inside the pipeline with catch Error, mapping failure to a value your template can render, or move to rx Resource where status() and error() are part of the contract.

-- pause --
Drill 17, rx Resource versus a hand-rolled to Signal pipeline.

Q: rx Resource went stable in v22. When would you use it instead of to Signal(pipeline$) ?-- think --
A: When the shape is "reactive params in, async value out, and the template needs loading or error state".
rx Resource({ params, stream }) re-runs the loader when params changes, aborts the previous one (its abort Signal unsubscribes your Observable), and exposes value(), status(), is Loading(), error(), has Value() and reload().
A to Signal(pipeline$) gives you a value and nothing else, every team that writes one also hand-rolls three sibling signals for loading, error and reload. Use RxJS when the pipeline is the point: debounce, retry with backoff, exhaust Map, ordering, or merging several sources.

Cross-Q: Your stream returns an Observable that completes without emitting, say EMPTY, or a stream where a filter rejected the only value. What does the resource do?-- think --
A: It errors, with "Resource completed before producing a value". It does not sit in loading forever and it does not fall back to default Value.
This surprises people migrating a filtered pipeline into a resource: if "no value" is a legitimate outcome, emit a value that represents it ( of(null), defaultIfEmpty(.) ) rather than completing empty.

Cross-Q²: Someone on your team says rx Resource proves signals have replaced RxJS. What is the accurate version?-- think --
A: rx Resource consumes an Observable, the loader's return type is Observable, so RxJS is still the transport. What v22 removed is the boilerplate around a very common shape: keyed async loading with cancellation and status.
What it did not remove: debouncing (except the narrow case covered by the experimental debounced() ), retry with backoff, exhaust Map semantics for writes, ordering guarantees, coordination between multiple streams, and everything push-driven. Signals own state; Observables own events.
rx Resource is the bridge for the one case that is both.

-- pause --
Drill 18, the 401 refresh race.

Q: Six requests fire on page load, the access token has just expired, and all six return 401. What does a naive interceptor do, and what should it do?-- think --
A: A naive catch Error(401) to refresh to retry interceptor issues six refresh calls.
With refresh-token rotation on the server, the first rotates the token and the other five present one that has just been invalidated, which a correct implementation treats as possible token theft and answers by revoking the whole token family, logging the user out.
The fix is single-flight: cache the in-flight refresh Observable in the service, share it with share Replay({ buffer Size: 1 }), and clear it in finalize so the gate reopens on success and failure. Every 401'd request then switch Map s onto the same refresh and replays itself once.

Cross-Q: What stops this from becoming an infinite loop?-- think --
A: Two guards. First, the refresh call itself must bypass the interceptor, mark it with an HttpContextToken ( SKIP_AUTH ) rather than matching on the URL, so a 401 from /auth or refresh propagates instead of triggering another refresh.
Second, retry the original request exactly once: if the replay also 401 seconds, log out rather than looping. It is also worth distinguishing 401 from 403, refreshing on 403 is a wasted round trip that masks an authorisation bug.

Cross-Q²: Why finalize rather than tap to clear the cached refresh Observable?-- think --
A: tap 's next or complete handlers do not run when the stream errors or is unsubscribed.
If the refresh fails once and you only cleared the cache on success, every future 401 in the session reuses a dead, permanently-erroring Observable, share Replay will replay that error to every new subscriber, so the app can never recover without a reload.
finalize runs on complete, error and unsubscribe, which is exactly the "the flight is over, whatever happened" semantic a single-flight gate needs.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

switch Map versus concat Map: switch Map cancels previous, concat Map queues sequentially.
merge Map versus exhaust Map: merge Map runs all in parallel, exhaust Map ignores new while busy.
Cold versus hot: cold = per-subscriber execution (H T T P); hot = shared (DOM events, Subjects).
share Replay(1): caches last emission and multicasts; canonical H T T P cache for one-shots.
BehaviorSubject over Subject: late subscribers immediately receive the current value.
takeUntilDestroyed(): v16, stable in v19; ties the stream to the injection context's DestroyRef. Outside an injection context it throws NG0203, pass takeUntilDestroyed(this.destroy Ref).
debounce Time needs distinctUntilChanged: otherwise repeating values still emit twice.
catch Error placement matters: catch inside switch Map to keep outer stream alive.
combine Latest waits for all: prepend start With() if any source is cold or late.
firstValueFrom for Promise interop: replaces deprecated .to Promise(); awaits first emission and rejects with EmptyError on empty completion ( to Promise resolved with undefined instead).
switch Map for reads, exhaust Map for writes: cancelling a POST cancels the response, not the write.
retry needs a predicate, a timeout and jitter: the delay callback's retry count is 1-based.
finalize over complete: it is the only hook that also runs on unsubscribe.
to Signal = subscribe now, undefined until first emission; require Sync throws NG0601 if the source is async.
to Observable = effect + ReplaySubject(1): latest on subscribe, one emission per stabilisation.
rx Resource (stable v22): params + stream, aborts on param change; completing without emitting is an error.
TestScheduler.run(): 1 frame = 1 millisecond (10 outside run ), auto-flush at the end, expect Subscriptions is how you prove cancellation.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Leaking subscriptions in a SPA.

Problem: After 100 navigations the app's C P U climbs to 80% and memory grows by 200 megabytes. Component instances appear stale: typing in a search box triggers requests that update components no longer on screen.

Diagnosis: Open Chrome DevTools to Performance Monitor; watch JS heap and listener counts grow monotonically across navigations.
Take heap snapshots before and after navigating between two routes 50 times; compare retained components, OrderListComponent instances accumulate, each retained by an OrderService.orders$ subscription closure.
Search the codebase for raw .subscribe( and find 14 components calling service.getX().subscribe(.) in ngOnInit with no teardown.

Fix: Three migration patterns. For one-shot H T T P, swap to to Signal(this api get Orders(), { initial Value: [] }) so Angular owns the lifecycle, or, on v22, to rx Resource / http Resource so loading and error state come with it.
For ongoing streams (search, polling), pipe takeUntilDestroyed() from @angular or core or rxjs-interop inside an injection context, or with an explicit DestroyRef outside one.
For templates, prefer @if (orders$ | async; as orders), the async pipe auto-unsubscribes on destroy, and binding once avoids the second subscription that two | async occurrences would create.
Then make it stick with lint: rxjs-angular-x or prefer-takeuntil (and rxjs-x or no-unsafe-takeuntil ) fail pull requests with bare or mis-ordered subscribes.
Note the plugin names, the original eslint-plugin-rxjs / eslint-plugin-rxjs-angular are unmaintained; the actively published forks are eslint-plugin-rxjs-x (rule prefix rxjs-x/ ) and eslint-plugin-rxjs-angular-x ( rxjs-angular-x/ ).

Why it works: Each leaked subscription pinned the component, its D I graph, and any closed-over template references.
takeUntilDestroyed() and the async pipe both register DestroyRef callbacks so streams complete deterministically; heap snapshots show retained instance count drop back to 1 after navigation.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Cold Observables run their producer per subscription. If a service exposes the Observable directly and two consumers subscribe (for example, template async pipe plus a .subscribe() in component code), each issues an H T T P request.
Fix with share Replay({ buffer Size: 1, ref Count: true }) to multicast the response, or read once and cache the result in a signal.

It waits for every source to emit at least once. If one source is a cold Observable that hasn't emitted (for example, a route param stream that fires only on navigation), the combined stream never starts.
Fix by prepending start With(initial Value) to that source, or use BehaviorSubject (already has a current value), or restructure with withLatestFrom so only the trigger source must emit.

switch Map cancels the in-flight request when the user clicks again, fine for idempotent reads but dangerous for non-idempotent saves (you may abort the network call after the server already started writing, leaving partial state).
exhaust Map ignores subsequent clicks while the save is running, safer for non-idempotent operations and prevents double-submission. Pair with a loading signal to disable the button visually.

tap signals intent, side effects (logging, telemetry, mutating cached state) without changing the stream.
map is for transformation; mutating in map and returning the same value technically works but obscures intent and breaks immutability assumptions in operators downstream (for example, distinctUntilChanged may now see the same reference). Reviewers should reject side effects inside map.

No. Signals model current values; Observables model streams of values over time. Events (clicks, websocket frames, debounced search), H T T P responses, and complex async pipelines (retry+backoff, race, sequencing) remain natural Observables.
Convert at the boundary with to Signal so the template binds to a signal while the upstream pipeline stays declarative. Rule of thumb: state to signal; events to Observable.
Note also that rx Resource, the v22 stable A P I people cite as evidence signals won, takes an Observable loader, so RxJS is still the transport underneath it.

The save. switch Map unsubscribes the previous inner Observable, which aborts the browser's request (the fetch backend, default since v22, calls AbortController.abort(); the XHR backend calls xhr.abort() ).
The server may already have committed: in A S P dot NET Core the disconnect surfaces as HttpContext.RequestAborted, but only handlers that actually thread that CancellationToken through will stop working.
So you have discarded the response to a write that happened, and the user, seeing nothing, clicks again. Use exhaust Map plus a disabled button, and make the endpoint idempotent with a client-generated key.

It removes undefined from the signal's type by asserting the source emits synchronously on subscription, correct for a BehaviorSubject, a ReplaySubject(1) that has already emitted, or any pipeline ending in start With.
If the source does not emit synchronously, Angular throws NG0601 at creation time. It therefore always throws on HttpClient, which is the mistake people make when they are trying to get rid of the undefined in a template.
For async data, use initial Value, or rx Resource / http Resource where "loading" is a first-class status rather than a sentinel value.

The feature goes quietly inert: error is terminal, so no further values arrive, the teardown has already run, and there is no automatic resubscribe. Typical report: "the save button stopped doing anything" with nothing in the console after the first stack trace.
Where the error went depends on the bridge, the async pipe routes it to Angular's ErrorHandler, to Signal rethrows it at read (so it detonates during template evaluation), a bare subscribe with no error callback goes to RxJS's unhandled-error path and surfaces as a global error.
The fix is a catch Error inside the inner pipe so a single failure cannot terminate the outer stream, plus an error-shaped value rather than a fallback that pretends success.