-- pause --
Section 1. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this section once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, NRT is compile-time only.

Q: At runtime, what's the difference between string and string? ?-- think --

A: None. Both are emitted as the same System.String in I L. NRT is purely a compile-time annotation layered on top of the type system, the? becomes a [Nullable(2)] metadata flag, not a wrapper type. There is no Nullable, no .HasValue, no runtime null check generated.

Cross-Q: If NRT is compile-time only, why does turning it on still catch real bugs?-- think --

A: The compiler performs flow analysis, it tracks every variable's "may-be-null" state through control flow ( if checks, early returns, ?? throw, [NotNullWhen] attributes).
Bugs surface as CS8602 ("dereference of a possibly null reference") at every site where you'd otherwise hit NullReferenceException. The analysis runs in the IDE in real time and in CI when warnings are errors.
Even though no runtime check exists, the wall of warnings forces defensive code at the right places.

Cross-Q²: A library was compiled without NRT and exposes public string GetName(). I consume it with NRT enabled. What does the analyzer think?-- think --

A: It treats the return as "null-oblivious", neither annotated nullable nor annotated non-nullable. The analyzer suppresses warnings on this value (won't yell at you for treating it as non-null), but also doesn't promise non-null.
You get partial safety: better than nothing, worse than a fully-annotated library. Modern dot NET BCL is fully annotated; older NuGet packages may not be. The annotations mode is for libraries that want to expose annotations without enforcing them on their own code.

-- pause --
Drill 2, When NRT lies, E F Core navigations.

Q: An E F Core entity has public Customer Customer { get; set; } = null!;, why the null! ?-- think --

A: E F Core populates navigation properties at materialization time (after the constructor runs), via reflection. From NRT's point of view, the property is non-nullable but is initialized to null, null!
is the escape hatch that says "I know this is null right now; trust me, the runtime will fix it before anyone reads it."

Cross-Q: When does that lie blow up in production?-- think --

A: When the navigation isn't loaded, you query _db.Orders.FirstOrDefault(o goes to o.Id == 42) without an .Include(o goes to o.Customer), and the property is null at runtime. NRT promised non-null; you get NullReferenceException.
E F Core at least 6 ships an analyzer warning for required-but-not-included navigations, and [Required] on the navigation throws on save if missing, but the runtime can still hand you a null on a "non-nullable" property, NRT's promise depends on disciplined .Include calls, lazy loading config,
or explicit projection.

Cross-Q²: What's the safest pattern then?-- think --

A: Three options, in order of preference. (1) Use explicit projection with Select into a DTO with real NRT annotations: _db.Orders.Select(o goes to new OrderDto(o.Id, o.Customer!.Name)), the projection forces you to think about each accessed property.
(2) For collection navigations, initialize to new(): public List Items { get; set; } = new();, empty list is null-safe and works in both materialized and constructed states. (3) For reference navigations that might be absent, declare them nullable: public Customer?
Customer { get; set; }, then the call sites force you to handle null. The null! pattern is a stopgap when you know loading is enforced elsewhere; the safer pattern is honesty about lifecycle.

-- pause --
Drill 3, The null-forgiving operator !.

Q: What does some Value! do at runtime?-- think --

A: Nothing. It's a compile-time suppression, the compiler emits the same I L as if the! weren't there. No null check is generated, no exception is thrown. The operator only tells the analyzer "suppress the nullable warning on this expression."

Cross-Q: When is! the right tool, and when is it a bug deferred?-- think --

A: Right tool: when you have invariant knowledge the analyzer can't see, for example, a Dictionary.TryGetValue pattern in legacy code, a value just validated by a custom helper, an out-of-process invariant.
Bug deferred: when used to silence warnings without proving non-null, the most common form is user.Profile!.Name when Profile is sometimes null. The! doesn't fix anything; it just hides the warning that was telling you the truth. A code review heuristic: every!
in a pull request should have a comment explaining why the analyzer is wrong.

Cross-Q²: How would you replace user.Profile!.Name safely?-- think --

A: Pick based on intent. (1) If null is a real possibility and you want a fallback: user.Profile?.Name ?? "Unknown". (2) If null is a contract violation that should crash: user.Profile?.Name ?? throw new InvalidOperationException("Profile required").
(3) If null means "skip this user": if (user.Profile is null) continue;. (4) If you want a typed precondition check at the top of a method: ArgumentNullException.ThrowIfNull(user.Profile);. Each generates real runtime behavior;! generates none.

-- pause --
Drill 4, ?. chains and short-circuit.

Q: Walk me through order?.Customer?.Address?.City.-- think --

A: The chain is short-circuit evaluating, if any link is null, the entire expression returns null without evaluating the rest. So if order is null, neither Customer nor Address nor City is accessed. If order is non-null but Customer is null, the same, no Address access. The return type is string?
(always nullable, because the chain can yield null).

Cross-Q: What's the difference between a?.b.c and a?.b?.c ?-- think --

A: a?.b.c short-circuits only on a, if a is non-null, it then accesses .b and then .c unconditionally. If b is null, b.c throws NullReferenceException. a?.b?.c short-circuits on both. The mistake: assuming one ?. covers the chain. Each member in the chain that can be null needs its own ?..
This is one of the most common subtle bugs after enabling NRT in a partially-annotated codebase.

Cross-Q²: How does ?. interact with method invocation and side effects?-- think --

A: obj?.Method(args) short-circuits, if obj is null, neither Method nor args is evaluated. This matters if args has side effects: obj?.Process(LogAndCompute()), LogAndCompute() only runs when obj is non-null.
C sharp 14's null-conditional assignment behaves the same way, which is the point people get backwards: in obj?.Total = ComputeTotal(); the right-hand side is not evaluated when obj is null.
The specification is explicit, "The right side of the assignment is only evaluated when the receiver of the conditional access is non-null", and as a statement P?.A = B is defined as if (P is not null) P.A = B;, with P evaluated once.
The consequence for real code: a logger, a counter or an audit call sitting in the right-hand side silently doesn't run on the null path. ?. short-circuits everything to its right, on both sides of the =.

-- pause --
Drill 5, ?? versus ??=.

Q: Difference between a ?? b and a ??= b ?-- think --

A: a ?? b is an expression, returns a if non-null, else b. Doesn't mutate. a ??= b is a statement that assigns b to a only if a is currently null. Equivalent to if (a is null) a = b;. Most common use case: lazy initialization, _cache ??= LoadFromDisk();.

Cross-Q: Why is ??= not equivalent to a = a ?? b ?-- think --

A: They're almost equivalent but ??= avoids re-assigning when a is non-null, important when a is a property with a setter that has side effects (raises INotifyPropertyChanged, triggers validation, writes through to a backing store). a = a ??
b always invokes the setter; a ??= b invokes it only when needed. For plain field assignments it doesn't matter, but for properties on U I models it can.

Cross-Q²: Can you ?? between different types?-- think --

A: Only if one is implicitly convertible to the other or they share a common base. int? x = null; int y = x ?? 0; works, int? and int are compatible. string? a = null; object b = a ?? "default"; works, string is object. But string? a = null; int b = a ??
0; is a compile error, string doesn't convert to int. The result type is the best-common-type of both operands; the compiler must find a single type that holds both.

-- pause --
Drill 6, Property patterns.

Q: What does o is { Status: "active" } translate to under the hood?-- think --

A: Roughly: o is not null and and o.Status == "active". The pattern combines a null check (because {.} matches non-null) with property access and equality. For value types, the null check is elided.
The equality is not ==: the C sharp standard defines a constant pattern as matching when object.Equals(e, v) returns true, except for integral or enum inputs (which use e == v ) and Span / ReadOnlySpan against a constant string (which uses MemoryExtensions.SequenceEqual ).
object.Equals handles a null Status safely, and, a consequence worth remembering, it also makes x is double.NaN match, where x == double.NaN never would.

Cross-Q: How would o is { Status: "active", Total: > 100 } differ?-- think --

A: All listed properties must match; the value set is the same as o is not null and and o.Status == "active" and and o.Total > 100. The > is a relational pattern (C sharp 9).
But the evaluation is not the same: the standard says "the order in which subpatterns are matched is not specified, and a failed match may not test all subpatterns at runtime." You may not assume Status is read first, and you may not assume Total goes unread when Status fails.
The compiler builds a decision structure over all the arms and shares common tests between them rather than lowering each pattern to a and and chain, which is what makes a large switch cheap, and what makes side effects in a pattern unsafe.

Cross-Q²: How do extended property patterns ( { Customer.Name: "Ahmed" } ) handle null along the chain?-- think --

A: They propagate null safely, the pattern silently fails (no match) if any intermediate property is null. o is { Customer.Name: "Ahmed" } matches only if o is non-null, o.Customer is non-null, and o.Customer.Name == "Ahmed". No NullReferenceException.
This is the killer feature of extended property patterns (C sharp 10): you get safe deep-property tests in one line, no need for o?.Customer?.Name == "Ahmed" (which still works but reads less naturally inside a switch ).

-- pause --
Drill 7, List patterns.

Q: When were list patterns introduced and what shapes do they cover?-- think --

A: C sharp 11 (2022). They match against any type with Length / Count and an int -indexer (so T[], List, string, Span, ReadOnlySpan, plus custom types with the right shape). The slice pattern. requires a Slice(int, int) method.
They cover exact-shape ( [1, 2, 3] ), partial ( [var first,., var last] ), length-only ( [, ] for "exactly two"), and combined with property or constant patterns ( [> 0,., 0] ).

Cross-Q: Does arr is [,., ] match a single-element array?-- think --

A: No. The slice. matches zero or more, but the two _ patterns each match exactly one element. Total minimum length is 2. So [1] doesn't match; [1, 2] does (slice matches empty); [1, 2, 3, 4] matches (slice matches [2, 3] ). The mental model: count the non-slice patterns to get the minimum length.

Cross-Q²: Why don't list patterns work on IEnumerable ?-- think --

A: IEnumerable is forward-only, no Count, no indexer. List patterns require random access ( Length / Count + [int] ) to be efficient. If the compiler emitted Count() + repeated enumeration, you'd silently quadratic-blow-up on long enumerables.
The shape-based requirement forces you to materialize ( ToList() / ToArray() ) or use a concrete type first, explicit cost. For streams, you typically pattern-match on the first few elements via .Take(2).ToArray() is [, ] or use link.

-- pause --
Drill 8, when clauses.

Q: What does the when clause add to a pattern?-- think --

A: An arbitrary boolean predicate evaluated after the pattern matches. The arm runs only if both the pattern matches AND the when returns true. Syntax: case Customer { Tier: "Gold" } c when c.AccountAgeDays > 365:.. Useful when the matching condition isn't structural.

Cross-Q: When does when hurt performance or readability?-- think --

A: Performance: when can disable the compiler's switch-table optimization, for int switches the compiler emits a jump table (O(1) dispatch); with when, it falls back to sequential evaluation (O(n) over arms).
For type-pattern switches the impact is smaller (already sequential), but expensive when predicates (database calls, regex, allocations) inside a switch make the whole switch slow.
Readability: complex when clauses hide logic that would be clearer as a method call or as a separate if after the switch. Heuristic: if your when clause is longer than the pattern, refactor.

Cross-Q²: Can when reference variables captured by the pattern?-- think --

A: Yes, that's its main use. case Order o when o.Total > o.Customer.CreditLimit:. uses the captured o. Variables bound by is patterns ( var x, declaration patterns) are in scope for the when clause.
Gotcha: in switch statements with fall-through arms, the captured variable is scoped per-arm, not across arms. Switch expressions don't have fall-through, so each arm is independent.

-- pause --
Drill 9, Switch expression versus switch statement.

Q: When would you choose a switch expression over a switch statement?-- think --

A: When the switch produces a value, assignment, return, or argument expression. The switch expression is exhaustiveness-checked, returns a value, doesn't allow side effects in arms (you can call methods but the arm result IS the value).
The switch statement is for side effects, multiple statements per case, fall-through, break / return / throw per case. Modern guidance: prefer switch expression for value = x switch {. } patterns; use switch statement for "do different things, no value to compute."

Cross-Q: What does exhaustiveness-checking actually warn on?-- think --

A: There isn't one warning, there are four, and naming them is the senior answer.
CS8509 is the general case, "does not handle all possible values of its input type. For example, the pattern '. ' is not covered." CS8524 fires when every declared enum member is handled but the enum's underlying type can still hold other values ("involving an unnamed enum value").
CS8655 fires when null isn't covered, and it fires even on a non-nullable string parameter if your catch-all is { }, because { } means "non-null" and only _ matches null.
CS8846 or CS8847 fire when the only candidate arm is guarded: "However, a pattern with a when clause might successfully match this value." One construct escapes checking entirely, per the docs, "list patterns don't generate a warning when all possible inputs aren't handled."

Cross-Q²: Why doesn't the switch expression on abstract record Animal with arms Dog, Cat warn me if I'm missing one?-- think --

A: Because on C sharp 14 the compiler does no closed-hierarchy analysis: it treats every reference type as open, another assembly can derive from your base, and null is always a possible value on top of that. Marking the base sealed changes nothing (and an abstract base can't be sealed ).
So the shape you write today ends with _ goes to throw new UnreachableException(), and "did somebody add a subtype without adding an arm?" stays a code-review and test concern.
C sharp 15, in preview with dot NET 11, closes this with the closed modifier: a switch over a closed base is exhaustive once every direct descendant is handled, with no discard arm.
Three caveats to state if you raise it:
every descendant must be visible at the switch site (a public closed base with an internal descendant is exhaustive in-assembly and warns out-of-assembly), null is still a separate value for a nullable governing type, and closure is not transitive, only direct descendants form the exhaustive set.
Say "preview", not "shipped."

-- pause --
Drill 10, is var x.

Q: What does obj is var x do?-- think --

A: It always matches and binds obj to x. The result is true regardless of what obj is, including null. Equivalent to var x = obj; if (true).. Useful inside a switch expression as a default arm with a name, or inside an expression to introduce a local binding.

Cross-Q: When is is var x actually useful versus just declaring a variable?-- think --

A: Two scenarios. (1) Inside a switch expression where you need to name the discard for use in the arm body: _ goes to Compute(unknown) doesn't bind a name; var u goes to Compute(u) binds.
(2) In side-effecting expressions where you want to capture a result for when clauses: case var x when ComputeHash(x) % 7 == 0:.. Outside those, prefer plain assignment, is var reads like a pattern but is actually unconditional.

Cross-Q²: Difference between is var x and is { } x ?-- think --

A: is var x matches anything including null; is { } x matches non-null only (the empty property pattern {} requires non-null). So obj is { } o is a tighter check, guarantees o is non-null. obj is var o doesn't.
For NRT flow analysis, prefer { } when you want the compiler to treat the binding as non-null in the downstream code.

-- pause --
Drill 11, Records and deconstruction in patterns.

Q: How does pattern matching interact with records?-- think --

A: Records auto-generate a Deconstruct method matching the positional parameters. This enables positional patterns: o is Order(decimal total, ) when total > 100 deconstructs in the pattern.
Records also work well with property patterns (the auto-generated init-only properties are matchable) and with with for non-destructive testing variants.

Cross-Q: Can I deconstruct a non-record class in a positional pattern?-- think --

A: Yes, any type with a Deconstruct method (instance or extension) works. class Point { public int X, Y; public void Deconstruct(out int x, out int y) goes to (x, y) = (X, Y); } enables p is (1, 2). The compiler invokes Deconstruct, then matches each output against the corresponding sub-pattern.
Records get this for free; classes need an explicit Deconstruct.

Cross-Q²: With record Order(int Id, Customer Cust), what's the difference between o is Order(_, { Name: "X" }) and o is Order { Cust.Name: "X" } ?-- think --

A: Both match the same set of objects. Order(_, { Name: "X" }) is a positional pattern, invokes Deconstruct, then sub-pattern matches the second output. Order { Cust.Name: "X" } is a property pattern with extended access, invokes the Cust getter, then .Name.
Trade-offs: positional ties to declaration order (refactoring-fragile); property ties to property names (declaration-order independent but verbose). For records with stable shape, positional reads cleaner. For records likely to grow new params, property patterns are safer.

-- pause --
Drill 12, NRT with collections.

Q: What's the difference between List, List?, and List? ?-- think --

A: All three are different. (1) List, non-null list, but elements may be null. (2) List?, the list reference itself may be null; elements are non-null. (3) List?, both may be null: the list reference, and each element. The?
placement matters, the analyzer flows the right state to each access site.

Cross-Q: Why does List list = new(); list.Add(null); warn?-- think --

A: List (element type without? ) declares "this list holds non-null strings." Add takes string (non-nullable). Passing null triggers CS8625 ("cannot convert null literal"). To allow null elements: declare List. To allow the whole list to be null but elements non-null: declare List? list = null;.
The annotation precisely matches the intent.

Cross-Q²: What does T? mean for unconstrained generics like Func ?-- think --

A: It depends on T, and the answer most people give is wrong for the value-type case. For an unconstrained T, Microsoft's rules are: with T = string, T? is string?; with T = string?, T? is still string? (there is no "doubly nullable"); and with T = int, T?
is just int, "the annotation has no effect on value types unless the type parameter has the struct constraint." It does not become Nullable. On an unconstrained T,? is a signal to the analyzer that the slot may hold default(T), not a wrapper. T? means Nullable only under where T: struct.

That asymmetry is exactly why [MaybeNull] and [NotNull] exist: a generic [return: MaybeNull] T Find(.) can say "may be absent" for both classes and structs, and? alone cannot. The constraint vocabulary is the other half of the answer: where T: class (non-nullable reference), where T: class?
(either), where T: struct (non-nullable value type, and T? becomes Nullable inside), where T: notnull (non-nullable reference or value type), and where T: BaseType? to allow a nullable derived type.

-- pause --
Drill 13, null! and default! in DTOs.

Q: When is public string Name { get; set; } = null!; the right pattern?-- think --

A: For frameworks that materialize objects without calling user constructors, Jason deserialization ( System.Text.Json uses reflection unless source-gen'd), E F Core navigation properties, A S P dot NET Core model binding, mocking libraries.
The runtime guarantees the property will be set before any user code reads it, but the analyzer can't see that promise. null! is the "I know better than the analyzer" marker.

Cross-Q: When is it the wrong pattern?-- think --

A: (1) When the property genuinely might not be set, Jason deserialization with missing fields, optional bindings. Use string? instead.
(2) When you control the construction path, make it required (C sharp 11): public required string Name { get; init; }, the compiler now enforces that callers set it in the object initializer.
(3) When the type has a real default, public string Name { get; set; } = string.Empty;, empty string beats null! for safety. The null! should be reserved for the framework-materialized case; for normal DTOs, required or default-initialization is cleaner.

Cross-Q²: How does default! compare to null! ?-- think --

A: Same role, generic-safe. null! is specifically null cast as non-null; works for reference types. default! is default(T) cast as non-null; works for any T including generics.
In a generic method, T result = default!; is correct (you don't know if T is a reference or value type); T result = null!; only compiles for reference-type-constrained T. For non-generic code, prefer null! for readability.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Recursive (extended) property patterns.

Q: Walk me through order is { Customer.Address.Country: "US" or "CA" }.-- think --

A: The pattern matches if order is non-null, order.Customer is non-null, order.Customer.Address is non-null, and order.Customer.Address.Country is either "US" or "CA". The dotted access is the extended property pattern (C sharp 10). The or inside the constant slot is a logical pattern (C sharp 9).
All null checks along the chain are implicit.

Cross-Q: Compare this to the nested form { Customer: { Address: { Country: "US" or "CA" } } }.-- think --

A: Semantically identical. The nested form makes the structure explicit (clear at a glance that Customer and Address are separate types), at the cost of vertical noise. The extended form ( Customer.Address.Country ) is denser and reads naturally for short chains.
Style heuristic: prefer extended for 2-3 level shallow access; prefer nested when each level has multiple property tests ( { Customer: { Tier: "Gold", Address.Country: "US" } }, mixed, drills deeply only at the leaves).

Cross-Q²: How does pattern matching choose between == and Equals for Country: "US" ?-- think --

A: Constant patterns use the equivalent of object.Equals (or specifically pattern matches if EqualityComparer.Default.Equals(actual, "US") ). For string, this is ordinal case-sensitive equality. For records, this invokes the record's auto-generated Equals.
For value types, it boxes only if necessary. Gotcha: case sensitivity, Country: "us" won't match "US". For case-insensitive matching, you need a when clause: { Country: var c } when c.Equals("us", StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase).

-- pause --
Drill 15, Span and NRT.

Q: What's special about Span and nullability?-- think --

A: Span is a ref struct, cannot be boxed, cannot live on the heap, cannot be a field of a non-ref-struct, cannot be null. The whole concept of "null Span" doesn't exist; instead, you have Span.Empty (zero-length span with valid pointer).
NRT annotations on Span are restricted accordingly: you can have Span (elements may be null) but not Span? (the span itself can't be null-annotated as a struct).

Cross-Q: How do you check "no data" on a Span then?-- think --

A: span.IsEmpty, checks Length == 0. Don't use span == default, that's a value comparison and works but is non-idiomatic. Don't try span is null, won't compile (value types can't match null patterns unless wrapped in Nullable, which ref struct types can't be).
The empty span is the equivalent of "null reference" in the Span world.

Cross-Q²: Why does Span exist with these restrictions when Memory is more flexible?-- think --

A: It's a representation constraint, not a preference. Span holds a managed reference (a ref T, a byref) plus a length.
The C L R's object model does not permit a byref-typed field on a heap object, a byref may point into the middle of an object, into a stack frame, or into unmanaged memory, and the runtime only reports those from stack frames.
So a type containing one has to be a ref struct, which the compiler then restricts to the stack (and to fields of other ref struct s). Everything else follows: no boxing, no heap fields, no Span?, no async capture.
Memory pays for heap-safety with an indirection, it stores an object owner plus offset and length, and .Span re-derives the byref on demand, which is what lets it be a field and cross an await.

Note what this answer does not claim.
"Span is faster than Memory" is the sort of thing people repeat with a multiplier attached; the honest version is mechanical: slicing a Span adjusts a pointer and a length with no allocation and no indirection, while every access through a Memory goes through .Span first.
Whether that is measurable in your loop is a question for [MemoryDiagnoser], not for folklore. The NRT and null restrictions in this drill fall out of the ref-struct rules, not from a separate design choice.

-- pause --
Drill 16, Where does the nullability information live?.

Q: You said string and string? are the same type at runtime. So how does a consumer of my compiled library know which parameters accept null?-- think --

A: Through metadata.
The compiler emits two synthesized attributes in System.Runtime.CompilerServices:
NullableAttribute, carrying a byte (or a byte[] for a constructed type like Dictionary>, one entry per reference-type position), and NullableContextAttribute, carrying one byte that sets a default for an enclosing type or method so only exceptions need their own attribute.
The byte values are 0 = oblivious, 1 = not annotated (non-nullable), 2 = annotated (nullable). This is metadata the compiler reads back on the consuming side, it is not a type and it generates no I L.

Cross-Q: Can I apply NullableAttribute myself, say from a source generator?-- think --

A: No, CS8623: Explicit application of 'System.Runtime.CompilerServices.NullableAttribute' is not allowed. The? is the only supported input, which is the compiler protecting the invariant that the annotation and the emitted metadata always agree.
The same "it's an annotation, not a type" rule shows up as CS8639 ( typeof(string?) ), CS8650 ( obj is string? ), CS8651 ( obj as string? ), CS8628 ( new object?() ) and, once you add a designation, so it's a pattern rather than an is-type test, CS8116 ( obj is string? s ).
If you are generating code and want annotations, emit a #nullable enable directive and write? in the generated source.

Cross-Q²: What is the practical difference between byte 0 and byte 2 at a call site?-- think --

A: Byte 2 (annotated) makes the analyzer challenge you: dereference without a check and you get CS8602. Byte 0 (oblivious) makes the analyzer silent, it will neither warn you for treating the value as non-null nor promise that it is.
That third state is the one people forget, and it is why a solution that is clean under warnings-as-errors can still be shipping NREs: the holes are in the dependencies that were compiled disable, and obliviousness looks exactly like safety from the outside.

-- pause --
Drill 17, The nullable context is two flags.

Q: A 400-file legacy project produces 6,000 warnings when you set enable. What do you do?-- think --

A: Split the two flags. isn't a switch, it's four combinations of an annotation flag and a warning flag. The staged path is disable to annotations to enable. Under annotations you get to declare nullability (?
works, T means non-nullable) with all warnings off, so you can publish an honest A P I surface to consumers and to your own downstream projects before fixing a single warning in your implementation. Then flip files to enable as you drain them, via #nullable enable per file.

Cross-Q: What does the warnings setting do that enable doesn't?-- think --

A: warnings runs the full null analysis and emits every dereference warning, but leaves all reference types nullable and makes? itself a warning. Its distinctive rule: members are considered not-null at the opening brace of methods.
It is a discovery mode, "show me where this code could throw", without asking you to commit to any annotation yet.
The pairing that matters: warnings finds bugs, annotations documents intent, and they are genuinely independent, which is why there are nine per-file pragma combinations ( #nullable enable warnings, #nullable disable annotations, #nullable restore, and so on).

Cross-Q²: Your project sets enable and treats CS8602 as an error. Name a category of file in that project where nullable is still off.-- think --

A: Generated code.
The global nullable context does not apply to files the compiler considers generated, and it decides that four ways: generated_code = true in .editorconfig; an comment as the first element in the file; a filename beginning TemporaryGeneratedFile_;
or a filename ending .designer.cs, .generated.cs, .g.cs, or .g i cs.
Everything in those files is compiled nullable-disabled, so its public surface is oblivious to consumers. Generators have to opt in by emitting #nullable themselves.
In practice this means your protobuf contracts, scaffolded EF models and designer files are outside the policy you think you enabled, treat them as an external boundary and validate at the mapping layer.

-- pause --
Drill 18, Two places the analysis is simply wrong.

Q: Give me a case where a non-nullable reference holds null and the compiler says nothing.-- think --

A: Two, both documented by Microsoft as known limitations. Arrays: string[] values = new string[3]; produces three nulls, and values[0].Length warns about nothing.
Default structs: for struct S { public string Name; }, S s = default; leaves Name null and the creation never warns, and new S() and default(T) inside a generic do the same.
Arrays of structs compose the two: every element starts at the struct's default, so every non-nullable reference field in every element starts null.

One refinement worth volunteering, because it shows you've actually tried it: the struct hole isn't uniformly silent. Roslyn tracks the member slots of a local it watched you initialise, so S s = default; s.Name.Length; in the same method does give CS8602.
It goes quiet as soon as the value arrives some other way, an element of an S[], a foreach variable, a parameter, a field, a method return. That is exactly the set of paths real code uses, which is why the hole matters despite the local-variable case being caught.

Cross-Q: Do required members fix the struct case?-- think --

A: Partly, and it's worth being precise. required forces a caller who writes new S {. } to initialize the member, which closes the constructor path. It does not close default(S), and it cannot, default is a zeroed value by definition and bypasses every constructor and initializer you have.
Same for new S[n]. So required is a real improvement on the paths where somebody is constructing the value, and no help at all on the paths where the runtime is producing it. If a struct has a non-nullable reference field, the honest position is that the field is string? and the reads are checked.

Cross-Q²: The compiler happily accepts if (o.Config is not null) Use(o.Config);. When is that unsafe?-- think --

A: When Config is a property whose getter can return a different value on each call.
The compiler assigns the member path o.Config a null-state slot and narrows it on the check, exactly as it would for a local, which is correct for fields and for the vast majority of properties, and wrong for anything that re-reads live state:
IOptionsMonitor.CurrentValue, a lazily-materialising navigation property, a snapshot accessor, a property backed by a ConcurrentDictionary lookup.
Two reads, two different values, and the analyzer silently believed the first one. The fix is a habit rather than a rule: read once into a local and check the local, if (o.Config is { } config) Use(config); does the read, the null test and the binding in one step.

-- pause --
Drill 19, Which attribute, and why not just ?.

Q: When is [NotNullWhen(true)] not enough, and you reach for something else?-- think --

A: The eleven attributes divide into four jobs. Preconditions ( [AllowNull], [DisallowNull] ) describe what a caller may pass, and each is only meaningful on the opposite annotation, [AllowNull] on a non-nullable slot, [DisallowNull] on a nullable one.
Postconditions ( [MaybeNull], [NotNull] ) describe what the caller may assume afterwards. Conditional postconditions ( [NotNullWhen], [MaybeNullWhen], [NotNullIfNotNull] ) key that assumption on the return value or on another argument.
Helpers ( [MemberNotNull], [MemberNotNullWhen] ) tell the compiler which fields a shared initializer assigns, which is the standard answer to a CS8618 flood in a class with several constructors. [DoesNotReturn] / [DoesNotReturnIf] stop the analysis dead.

Cross-Q: Show me the case for [AllowNull] on a property.-- think --

A: A property that never returns null but accepts null on the way in as "reset to default":

csharp.
[AllowNull].
public string ScreenName.
{.
get goes to _screenName;
set goes to _screenName = value ?? GenerateRandomScreenName();
}.
private string _screenName = GenerateRandomScreenName();

string? would be wrong, it would force every reader to null-check something that is never null. string alone would be wrong, it would warn every caller who assigns null deliberately. [AllowNull] string says exactly the two things that are true.
Note it goes on the property, not the accessor: preconditions apply only to arguments, and the only argument is the setter's value. [DisallowNull] string? is the mirror, reads may be null, writes may not.

Cross-Q²: Debug.Assert(x is not null); silences CS8602. Is that a good null guard?-- think --

A: It's a good development check and not a guard at all. The declaration in dotnet or runtime is [Conditional("DEBUG")] [OverloadResolutionPriority(-1)] public static void Assert([DoesNotReturnIf(false)] bool condition).
[DoesNotReturnIf(false)] is what makes the analyzer narrow after the call, without it the compiler would learn nothing, since the analysis doesn't trace into method bodies. But [Conditional("DEBUG")] means the compiler omits the call entirely when DEBUG isn't defined, which is the build you ship.
So the Release binary has the protection of a bare! while the source reads as defensive. If the invariant matters in production, ArgumentNullException.ThrowIfNull(x), unconditional, and it fills the parameter name in from [CallerArgumentExpression].

-- pause --
Drill 20, Where? stops being compile-time only.

Q: You keep saying NRT has no runtime effect. Microsoft's own docs carry a caveat. What is it?-- think --

A: "Nullable reference annotations don't introduce behavior changes, but other libraries might use reflection to produce different runtime behavior for nullable and non-nullable reference types." The? has no effect in your process; it has plenty of effect in libraries that reflect over it.
Three you use every day: E F Core, the docs say it "interprets a nullable reference as an optional value, and a non-nullable reference as a required value", so adding or removing a? on an entity property is a schema change that lands in your next migration.
A S P dot NET Core M V C, with a nullable context enabled, every non-nullable reference type on a bound model behaves as if it carried [Required(AllowEmptyStrings = true)], controlled by MvcOptions.SuppressImplicitRequiredAttributeForNonNullableReferenceTypes.
System.Text.Json, historically ignored annotations entirely; dot NET 9 added JsonSerializerOptions.RespectNullableAnnotations to opt in.

Cross-Q: What exactly does RespectNullableAnnotations enforce, and what does it not?-- think --

A: It makes the serializer "throw an exception when trying to serialize a null value from a non-nullable property getter, or when deserializing a null value into a non-nullable property setter or constructor parameter", and it honours [NotNull], [MaybeNull], [AllowNull] and [DisallowNull] too.
What it does not do is stated just as plainly: "this setting only governs nullability annotations of non-generic properties, fields, and constructor parameters.
It cannot be used to enforce nullability annotations of root-level types, collection elements, or generic parameters." So List Tags can still deserialize with null elements.
It's off by default; the recommendation is to set it, along with RespectRequiredConstructorParameters, in new applications, and the app-wide default can be moved with the System.Text.Json.Serialization.RespectNullableAnnotationsDefault feature switch.

Cross-Q²: Why is that limitation the same limitation as one of the two known pitfalls in the analysis?-- think --

A: Because both are the collection-element hole.
The compiler can't stop new string[3] from being three nulls, and the serializer can't stop ["a", null, "c"] from filling a List with one, the runtime has no representation of "non-nullable element" to check against, only metadata the compiler wrote for the compiler's benefit.
Same root cause, two different tools failing at it. Which is the real lesson about NRT at a boundary: the annotation is a claim about your intent, and it only becomes a guarantee where something specific is enforcing it, and only as far as that thing reaches.

-- pause --
Drill 21, Reading a pattern's cost.

Q: What does frame is [0x01,. var body, var checksum] compile to, and what does it cost?-- think --

A: The specification gives the lowering directly: frame.Length is >= 2 and and frame[Index(0)] is 0x01 and and frame[Range(Index(1,false), Index(1,true))] is var body and and frame[Index(1, from End:true)] is var checksum. Two things fall out.
The minimum length is the number of non-slice subpatterns, so [,., ] requires two elements, not one. And the only line that can allocate is the Range access. For a T[] the compiler special-cases that to RuntimeHelpers.GetSubArray, for a string to string.Substring, both copy.
A Span / ReadOnlySpan has no Range indexer, but it satisfies the sliceable requirement with Slice(int, int), which returns a view and allocates nothing.

Cross-Q: So is. expensive?-- think --

A: A bare. is free. The standard calls it "a proper discard; that is, no tests shall be made for such pattern", it only changes the length test and which indices the other subpatterns read.
The requirements differ accordingly: a list pattern needs the type to be countable ( Length / Count ) and indexable (an Index indexer, or an indexer taking one int, with the former preferred).
Only a slice with a subpattern additionally needs the type to be sliceable (a Range indexer, or Slice(int, int) ). So [1,., 9] and [1,. var mid, 9] have genuinely different type requirements and genuinely different costs, and the difference is three characters.

Cross-Q²: How would you make that parser allocation-free without changing the pattern?-- think --

A: Change the receiver's type, not the pattern.
ReadOnlySpan frame instead of byte[] frame keeps the pattern character-for-character and turns the slice from a copy into a view, because a span meets the sliceable requirement with Slice(int, int), which returns a span over the same memory rather than a copy.
This is the general shape of span refactoring: the call sites and the logic stay put, and the cost model changes because the signature changed.
Verify it with [MemoryDiagnoser] and a [Params] sweep over payload size, a copy scales with the payload, a view is flat, and that difference is visible in the Allocated column without needing to trust anybody's multiplier.

-- pause --
Drill 22, Precedence and parenthesization.

Q: What does c is not >= 'a' and <= 'z' mean?-- think --

A: Not what it looks like. Precedence is not, then and, then or, three levels, and not binds tightest. So it parses as c is ((not >= 'a') and = 'a' and <= 'z').

Cross-Q: Same question for x is not string or byte[].-- think --

A: It parses as (not string) or byte[].
Walk the cases and the bug is obvious: a string gives false or false (no match), an unsupported type gives true or false (match), and a byte[] gives true or true (match), because a byte[] really is "not a string", and the first alternative has already succeeded.
Used as if (x is not string or byte[]) throw;, it rejects one of the two types it was written to permit. Tests that only cover the first type stay green. The fix is is not (string or byte[]), and the durable rule is to parenthesize every not in a compound pattern unconditionally.

Cross-Q²: Why can't I write x is null or { } v ?-- think --

A: CS8780, a variable may not be declared beneath a not or or pattern. The standard's reason is definite assignment: "neither not nor or can produce a definite assignment for a pattern variable", on the null branch of that or, v would be in scope and unassigned.
and is fine ( x is not null and { } v binds v ), because both sides must have matched.
Two related syntax rules from the same family:
== and != are not pattern operators ( CS9344 / CS9345, the constant pattern is the equality test, and not is the negation), and a bare can't be the whole pattern of an is expression or a switch statement label, write var ( CS8523 is the diagnostic that names the case-label form;
depending on what binds to you may instead see CS0103 / CS0246, or CS8512 / CS8513 when a constant or type named is in scope), though it can be a switch expression arm.

-- pause --
Drill 23, Patterns and conversions.

Q: object o = 5; if (o is long l) {. }. Does it match?-- think --

A: No. A declaration pattern matches on identity, derivation, interface implementation, another implicit reference conversion, Nullable with HasValue, or a boxing or unboxing conversion, and the spec explicitly excludes user-defined conversions and implicit span conversions.
There is no unboxing conversion from a boxed Int32 to Int64. The implicit int to long widening you rely on everywhere else is a compile-time conversion on a value; once the value is boxed, the pattern tests the exact runtime type and nothing more. o is 5L fails for the same reason.
This bites hardest at deserialization boundaries, where a Jason number that fits in an Int32 comes back boxed as int and a long arm silently falls through to the discard.

Cross-Q: What about int? x = 7; x is int v ?-- think --

A: That one does match, a Nullable matches a type pattern T when HasValue is true, and v is bound to the unwrapped value. The pattern is more forgiving here than a cast. What you can't write is x is int? v, CS8116: It is not legal to use nullable type in a pattern; use the underlying type instead.
And note that a Nullable with no value boxes to a plain null reference, so object o = (int?)null; gives o is null to true and o is int to false. Consistent, once you know Nullable never survives boxing.

Cross-Q²: x is double.NaN, does it match a NaN? And x is > double.NaN ?-- think --

A: The first matches; the second doesn't compile.
A constant pattern matches when object.Equals(e, v) returns true (except for integral or enum inputs, which use e == v, and Span against a constant string, which uses MemoryExtensions.SequenceEqual ), and Equals treats NaN as equal to itself, so double.NaN goes to "Unknown" is a working switch arm,
even though x == double.NaN is always false.
A relational pattern against NaN is CS8782: Relational patterns may not be used for a floating-point NaN, because every relational comparison with NaN is false and the compiler refuses to let you write an arm that can never match.
Two neighbours worth knowing by number: CS8781 (relational patterns aren't defined for this type, s is > "a" on a string;
note that o is > 5 on an object is fine, because the standard falls back to an unboxing conversion to int ) and CS9060 (you can't use a numeric constant or relational pattern on a T constrained to INumberBase; narrow with a type pattern first).

-- pause --
Section 2. Self-test.

It says: "when this method returns true, the out parameter is guaranteed non-null." Combined with NRT, the analyzer can flow that knowledge: if (TryGetUser(id, out var user)) { user.DoSomething(); }, the analyzer no longer warns on user.DoSomething() because returning true means user is non-null.
Without the attribute, the analyzer would conservatively assume user could be null on either branch. Critical for TryGet / TryParse patterns and for libraries that want callers to write idiomatic code without !.

The abstract record base + sealed cases + exhaustive switch gives DU-like ergonomics. The _ goes to throw arm is a safety net the compiler insists on (it can't prove sealed-derived exhaustion across assemblies).
True discriminated-union syntax is in the C sharp language proposal pipeline but not yet shipped.

?? throw is shorter and inline-compatible: var u = repo.Get(id) ?? throw new NotFoundException(id);, idiomatic for fluent code. if (x is null) throw reads better when you want a named contract check at the top of a method ( ArgumentNullException.ThrowIfNull(x); is the modern one-liner).
Trade-offs: ?? throw couples value-fetching with null-policy in one expression; ArgumentNullException.ThrowIfNull adds the parameter name to the exception automatically (uses [CallerArgumentExpression] ). For public-A P I guard clauses, prefer ThrowIfNull; for inline value extraction, prefer ??
throw.

It matches: obj is non-null, is a List (not for example, int[] ), has at least one element, and the first element is 1. The pattern combines type, property, and indexer access. Equivalent to: if (obj is List list and and list.Count > 0 and and list[0] == 1).
The pattern form is preferred because (a) the Count > 0 guard prevents the list[0] from throwing, pattern matching short-circuits left to right; (b) list is in scope only in the matched branch; (c) the analyzer treats list as non-null inside the block.
Modern equivalent with list patterns: if (obj is List [1,.]).

This is the canonical E F Core idiom: navigation properties are populated by the runtime when the entity is loaded, never by user code. The null!
says "I know this is null at construction but EF will fix it before I read it." Acceptable, but better alternatives in modern E F Core: (1) declare with default!
and document; (2) use a constructor that the EF materializer can invoke (with mapped fields); (3) for required navigations, declare Orders { get; set; } = new(); so empty list is the default, works for collection navs but not for reference navs. Trade-off: null!
is honest about the EF lifecycle but defeats null-safety for that property; new() is null-safe but might cause confusion if EF doesn't overwrite empty collections.

The premise is false for this specific library. Microsoft's documentation states that E F Core reads the nullable attributes and "interprets a nullable reference as an optional value, and a non-nullable reference as a required value." Removing the?
therefore changes the model from optional to required, and the next dotnet ef migrations add will emit an ALTER COLUMN. NOT NULL.
That migration succeeds against any database whose existing rows all have values, which is typically a freshly-seeded dev or staging database, and fails against production data containing NULL s, at deploy time.

Two review rules follow. First, a diff that touches a? on an entity type is a schema diff, and the generated migration belongs in the pull request. Second, the general principle: NRT has no runtime effect in your process, and that is a much narrower claim than "no runtime effect".
Any library that reflects over nullability metadata, E F Core for required or optional, A S P dot NET Core M V C for implicit [Required], System.Text.Json when RespectNullableAnnotations is on, turns your annotation into behaviour.

CS8655: The switch expression does not handle some null inputs (it is not exhaustive). The catch-all isn't one. { } is the empty property pattern, and a property pattern "checks that the input value is not null ", so { } matches every non-null value and nothing else.
The discard _ is the real catch-all: it matches any value including null.

The parameter being declared string rather than string? doesn't rescue it.
Non-nullability is an annotation the compiler enforces where it can see the callers; the value space of System.String still contains null, and the value can arrive from an oblivious assembly, from reflection, from a deserializer, or through a! in some caller. The compiler is right to insist.

The fix is _ goes to -1. Keep { } for what it's genuinely good at, if (GetThing() is { } thing) reads better than a null check plus an assignment, and it binds a variable the analyzer treats as non-null. Just never reach for it as a default arm.

They're in genuine tension and you have to pick, but the framing most people use is wrong because it assumes one warning code.

No discard arm gives you the compile-time check: add an enum member, get a warning, promote it to an error in CI, build fails.
The cost is that an unnamed value at runtime, (Status)7 from a bulk data fix, a legacy row, or a bad integration, throws SwitchExpressionException, whose message names neither the value nor the switch, so the incident starts with a useless stack trace.

A discard arm with _ goes to throw new InvalidOperationException($"Unhandled status {s}") gives you an excellent runtime error and destroys the compile-time check, because the switch is now exhaustive forever.

The resolution: keep the discard arm for diagnosability, and make the compile-time check come from the warnings rather than from the absence of an arm, which means knowing there are two codes to promote, not one.
With all declared members handled you get CS8524 ("involving an unnamed enum value"), not CS8509, so a CS8509 that looks like it's guarding you is guarding nothing. Promote both. Add CS8655 (null inputs) if the governing type is a reference type.

. var body is a slice with a subpattern, which requires the type to be sliceable and lowers to a Range access.
Arrays have no Range indexer and no Slice method, so the compiler special-cases them: the standard says "for string s and arrays, string.Substring and RuntimeHelpers.GetSubArray, respectively, shall be used." GetSubArray allocates a new array and copies.
So this parser allocates a full copy of every payload, purely to give it a name, once per message, which shows up in a memory profile as byte[] dominating gen-0 with no obvious allocation site in the parser code.

The one-line fix is to change the parameter type to ReadOnlySpan. The pattern text doesn't change at all; a span meets the sliceable requirement with Slice(int, int), which returns a span over the same memory, so the slice becomes a view over the original buffer.

Worth also knowing what isn't the problem: a bare. costs nothing.
payload is [0x02,., 0x03] needs only countability and indexability, makes no slice, and allocates nothing, the standard describes it as "a proper discard; that is, no tests shall be made for such pattern." The three characters var body are the entire cost.

The attribute wins, and the reason is not brevity.

[NotNullWhen(true)] string?
s on the helper's parameter is a single change that removes all 150 warnings, because it tells the compiler the one thing it cannot work out for itself, the docs are explicit that "the analysis doesn't trace into the bodies of methods", no matter how obviously the body is a null check.

150! s remove the same 150 warnings and look equivalent on the day of the change. They differ afterwards. Each!
is a permanent, unconditional suppression at that expression: it will keep suppressing when the surrounding code is refactored, when the guard is moved, when someone checks IsValidId(a) and dereferences b.
The attribute is conditional, it only narrows on the true branch of an actual call, so those mistakes surface as fresh warnings.
In practice, replacing a wall of suppressions with one attribute reliably uncovers real bugs that the suppressions were hiding, which is the strongest argument available: the two options aren't equally safe, they're opposite in kind.

The reviewable heuristic to take away: when the same! appears at more than a handful of call sites, the defect is in a signature, not at the call sites. A! should be rare enough that each one can carry a comment explaining why the analyzer is wrong.