-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

sequel is the lingua franca of relational data, born in 1974, standardized through 12+ ANSI or ISO revisions, still the way most production systems persist business state in 2026. Every senior backend engineer needs to read and write sequel fluently, regardless of how much ORMs hide.
The moment you debug a slow query, design a reporting view, or pluck data out of an unfamiliar database, you're in sequel territory.

this session covers the foundational vocabulary: the five sublanguages (DDL, DML, DCL, TCL, DQL), data types and constraints, the four crud verbs, and the basic clauses ( WHERE, ORDER BY, LIMIT ). Everything else in this sub-chapter builds on this surface.

When NOT to memorize: vendor-specific dialect details (T sequel's TOP versus Postgres Q L's LIMIT ). Get the standard sequel shape right; look up dialect specifics. Most interview questions accept either dialect as long as logic is correct.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
The five sequel sublanguages.

sequel is informally divided into five sublanguages by purpose. You'll see these terms in interviews and documentation.

DDL (Data Definition), Define schema, CREATE, ALTER, DROP, TRUNCATE, RENAME.
DML (Data Manipulation), Modify rows, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE.
DQL (Data Query), Read rows, SELECT.
DCL (Data Control), Permissions, GRANT, REVOKE.
TCL (Transaction Control), Transaction boundaries, BEGIN, COMMIT, ROLLBACK, SAVEPOINT.

In practice, you'll use DML and DQL daily, DDL during migrations, TCL when you need atomicity, DCL rarely (DBAs handle it). Knowing the names matters in interviews because they signal "this engineer has actually studied sequel, not just copied snippets."

The line that matters operationally is where DDL and TCL meet: whether a schema change can be rolled back. Postgres Q L and sequel Server run most DDL inside a transaction; MySQL and Oracle commit implicitly at each DDL statement. See Drill 1.

In the real world: a release adds a column, backfills it and creates an index as three statements in one migration script.
On Postgres Q L that script runs as one transaction, so a timeout on the third statement leaves the database exactly as it started and "re-run the migration" is a safe instruction.
The same script on MySQL commits at every DDL boundary, a timeout mid-backfill leaves the column added, some rows populated, no index, and a migration-history row that already says this version was applied.
The lesson is not "write a better script": it is that on MySQL every migration step has to be individually re-runnable, because the engine will not undo the earlier ones for you.

-- pause --
Data types.

The big four categories, with dot NET-mapping notes:

Numeric:
INT / INTEGER, 32-bit signed (~ plus or minus 2.1 billion). Most common for IDs.
BIGINT, 64-bit signed (~ plus or minus 9 quintillion). For counts that might exceed 2B, or for high-cardinality IDs.
SMALLINT, 16-bit (~ plus or minus 32k).
DECIMAL(p, s) / NUMERIC(p, s), fixed-point with p total digits, s after the decimal. Use for money: DECIMAL(18, 2) is the standard.
FLOAT / REAL / DOUBLE PRECISION, IEEE-754. Avoid for money (rounding errors); fine for scientific.

String:
VARCHAR(n), variable-length, max n characters. Use a sensible cap ( VARCHAR(255), VARCHAR(1000) ).
CHAR(n), fixed-length, padded with spaces. Rarely the right choice; use VARCHAR.
TEXT / VARCHAR(MAX), unbounded. For large free-form content (descriptions, Jason blobs).
NVARCHAR(n) (sequel Server), Unicode (UTF-16). Always use for any user-facing text. Postgres Q L's VARCHAR is Unicode by default.

Date or Time:
DATE, date only (no time). YYYY-MM-DD.
TIME, time only (no date).
DATETIME / TIMESTAMP, date + time. Behavior on time zones varies by vendor.
TIMESTAMPTZ (Postgres Q L) / DATETIMEOFFSET (sequel Server), with time-zone information. Use this for events that cross time zones.

Boolean and other:
BOOLEAN, TRUE or FALSE or NULL (Postgres Q L). sequel Server uses BIT.
UUID (Postgres Q L) / UNIQUEIDENTIFIER (sequel Server), 128-bit GUID.
Jason / JSONB (Postgres Q L), Jason document.
BYTEA / VARBINARY, binary data.

Picking right:
IDs: INT for most apps; BIGINT if you'll exceed 2B rows; UUID for cross-server uniqueness or client-generated IDs.
Money: DECIMAL(18, 2) (or NUMERIC(18, 2) ).
Timestamps: always store as UTC in TIMESTAMP / DATETIMEOFFSET with TZ info; convert to user's TZ at the edge.
Free text: VARCHAR(255) for short, TEXT for long.

Two type choices bite later rather than immediately, so decide them deliberately now:

FLOAT for money. Binary floating point cannot represent most decimal fractions exactly, and floating-point addition is not associative, so a SUM over the same rows can differ depending on the order they are added, which changes when the optimizer switches to a parallel aggregate.
The report disagrees with itself between runs and nothing is corrupt.
The dot NET type on the other end. DECIMAL / NUMERIC maps to decimal, FLOAT / DOUBLE PRECISION to double, REAL to float, a decimal property over a float column silently rounds on the way through. Check the mapping, not just the column.

In the real world: an invoicing service stores line totals as FLOAT because someone wanted "fast maths", and for years the only symptom is that the monthly revenue report and the accounting export disagree by a rounding-shaped amount that nobody can attribute to a specific invoice.
The migration to DECIMAL(18, 2) had to be scheduled with finance, because converting the stored values changes a small number of historical invoice totals, restating figures that have already been sent to customers.
This is why the type is chosen on day one: the cost of the wrong one is not the migration, it is that the wrong values are already in other people's spreadsheets.

Integer arithmetic stays integer, and that is where a report loses its decimals. Dividing one integer by another is not the same operation in every engine:

sequel Server, Truncated to an integer, "If an integer dividend is divided by an integer divisor, the result is an integer that has any fractional part of the result truncated" (Microsoft Learn, / (Division)).
Postgres Q L, Truncated toward zero, The operator table reads "Division (for integral types, division truncates the result towards zero)" and lists 5 / 2 to 2, 5.0 / 2 to 2.5000000000000000.
MySQL, Fractional, / produces a fractional result, the manual's own example is SELECT 3 or 5 to 0.60. Integer division is the separate DIV operator: 5 DIV 2 to 2.

sequel Server applies the same rule to aggregates. Its AVG return-type table maps tinyint, smallint and int all to int, so an average over an int column comes back whole, the documentation's own worked example prints 25 for average vacation hours.
Both cases have the same fix: widen an operand before the arithmetic, not after. SUM(paid) 1.0 / COUNT() or CAST(a AS DECIMAL(18,4)) / b works; CAST(a / b AS DECIMAL(18,4)) does not, because the truncation already happened inside the parentheses.

In the real world: a conversion-rate tile on an internal dashboard reads 0% for every acquisition channel except one, which reads 1%.
The query is CAST(converted / visits AS DECIMAL(5,2)) over two int columns on sequel Server: integer division discards the fraction before the cast ever runs, so any rate 100% collapses to zero.
It went unquestioned for months because "0%" on a new channel reads as a tracking problem, not an arithmetic one, and the single channel showing 1% was the only evidence the pipeline worked at all. converted * 1.0 / visits fixed every tile in one edit.

-- pause --
Constraints.

Constraints enforce data integrity at the database level, the last line of defense, after application validation.

Six common constraints:
PRIMARY KEY, unique + not null + indexed. Each table should have exactly one.
FOREIGN KEY, references another table's primary key. Enforces referential integrity. ON DELETE CASCADE / SET NULL / RESTRICT controls cascade behavior.
UNIQUE, values must be unique. NULL handling differs by engine (below).
NOT NULL, value required.
CHECK (expression), arbitrary boolean predicate per row.
DEFAULT value, used when INSERT omits the column.

Always declare constraints. Application code is not a substitute, DB constraints catch bugs that app code missed, prevent corruption from manual sequel fixes, and remain even when an engineer bypasses the A P I.

Four things about constraints that only show up in production.

1. A CHECK rejects FALSE, not "not TRUE". Constraints live in the same three-valued logic as WHERE, but with the opposite default. Microsoft Learn is blunt about it: "CHECK constraints reject values that evaluate to FALSE.
Because null values evaluate to UNKNOWN, their presence in expressions might override a constraint." Postgres Q L says the same:
"a check constraint is satisfied if the check expression evaluates to true or the null value." So in the DDL, age INT CHECK (age >= 0 AND age <= 150) accepts NULL happily, the column is nullable and the predicate is UNKNOWN, which is not FALSE.
If you mean "a value, and it must be in range", you need both NOT NULL and the CHECK.

In the real world: a discount_percent column carries CHECK (discount_percent BETWEEN 0 AND 100) and the pricing service still finds rows it has to treat as "no discount" for customers who were promised one.
The constraint is behaving exactly as specified, a bulk import left the field empty, NULL made the predicate UNKNOWN, and every one of those rows was waved through.
The team had read the CHECK as "this column is always a valid percentage" when it actually says "this column is never an invalid percentage", and the gap between those two sentences is the whole bug.

2. UNIQUE and NULL are not the same everywhere. The standard treats two NULLs as distinct for uniqueness, so several NULLs should be allowed:

sequel Server, maps to, Only one NULL, "as with any value participating in a UNIQUE constraint, only one null value is allowed per column" (Microsoft Learn).
Postgres Q L, maps to, Many NULLs. Postgres Q L 15+ can opt in to the sequel Server behaviour with UNIQUE NULLS NOT DISTINCT.
MySQL (InnoDB), maps to, Many NULLs.

This bites on soft delete: UNIQUE (email) plus a deleted_at column means a deleted user's address is blocked forever. The portable fix is a unique index that only covers live rows, a partial index in Postgres Q L, a filtered index in sequel Server, same syntax in both:

MySQL has no filtered index, so the usual workaround there is to fold the deletion marker into the key ( UNIQUE (email, deleted_at) with a sentinel, not NULL), which is exactly the "sentinel versus NULL" trade-off from NULL semantics.

3. A FOREIGN KEY does not create an index on the child column, except in MySQL. The constraint indexes nothing on the referencing side in sequel Server, Postgres Q L or Oracle; the referenced side is already indexed because it is a PK or UNIQUE.
MySQL is the exception and documents it: "In the referencing table, there must be an index where the foreign key columns are listed as the first columns in the same order. Such an index is created on the referencing table automatically if it does not exist" (MySQL 8.4 manual).
Everywhere else, you add that index yourself, and the symptom of not doing so is deletes and updates of parent rows scanning the child table.

In the real world: deleting one customer from an admin screen takes minutes and blocks the orders table while it runs.
The FK on orders.customer_id is doing its job, before the parent row can go, the engine has to prove no child row references it, and with no index on customer_id proving that means reading every order.
It had been fine for years because the orders table used to be small, and it stayed unnoticed because the schema diagram draws the FK as a line between two tables and gives no hint about which side is indexed. One index on the child column turned it back into a seek.

4. A constraint can exist and still guarantee nothing about the rows already in the table. Adding a constraint to a populated table means scanning that table, and holding it while you do.
Every engine therefore offers a way to skip the scan, and skipping it records the constraint as unverified, which is a weaker thing than it looks in the schema.

sequel Server, ALTER TABLE t WITH NOCHECK ADD CONSTRAINT., is_not_trusted = 1 in sys.check_constraints ("CHECK constraint has not been verified by the system for all rows") and in sys.foreign_keys ("FOREIGN KEY constraint has not been verified by the system").
Cleared by ALTER TABLE t WITH CHECK CHECK CONSTRAINT ALL.
Postgres Q L, ALTER TABLE t ADD CONSTRAINT. NOT VALID, pg_constraint.convalidated = false. Cleared by VALIDATE CONSTRAINT.

Postgres Q L states the trade-off it is making:
"With NOT VALID, the ADD CONSTRAINT command does not scan the table and can be committed immediately", and the later VALIDATE CONSTRAINT "acquires only a SHARE UPDATE EXCLUSIVE lock on the table being altered", so the scan happens without blocking writers.
That two-step is the standard online way to add a constraint to a large table, and it is meant to be finished.

Both engines enforce the constraint on new rows either way. What differs is what the engine will believe. On sequel Server that belief is also a query-plan input: "The query optimizer doesn't consider constraints that are defined WITH NOCHECK " (Microsoft Learn, ALTER TABLE).

In the real world: a CHECK (total >= 0) is added to orders with WITH NOCHECK because validating it against the full table would have overrun the release window, with a ticket to validate it "next sprint".
A year later a reconciliation job finds negative totals and the first theory is that the constraint is broken. It isn't, it has only ever been applied to rows written since it was added, and is_not_trusted had been 1 the whole time.
The team had been reading the constraint as a statement about the table when it was only a statement about future writes.
ALTER TABLE orders WITH CHECK CHECK CONSTRAINT ALL is what converts one into the other, and it fails loudly if the historical rows really do violate it, which was the answer they needed a year earlier.

-- pause --
SELECT, the workhorse.

The most-executed sequel statement on Earth. The basic shape:

Logical execution order (different from written order!):

Knowing this order explains many "weird" behaviors, like why WHERE can reference table columns but not aliases defined in SELECT, or why HAVING can reference aggregates but WHERE cannot.

The column list is not cosmetic. It decides whether an index can answer the query on its own (every column you ask for is in the index) or whether the engine has to go back to the table for each row, a key lookup in sequel Server, a heap fetch in Postgres Q L.
SELECT * opts out of that permanently: the query now asks for whatever columns the table happens to have next year.

In the real world: an order-list endpoint is served entirely from a covering index and is quick for a year. Someone adds a notes NVARCHAR(MAX) column to orders for a support feature and the endpoint starts timing out, no deploy touched it, no query changed.
Because it was written as SELECT * it now asks for a column the index does not contain, so every row that used to be answered from the index becomes a lookup back into the table.
A schema change alone moved a sequential index read into random I O per row, and the only defence that would have held is naming the columns.

-- pause --
INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE.

Always include WHERE on UPDATE and DELETE. The single missing WHERE is the canonical horror story, "I deleted the entire users table." Some engineers wrap UPDATE or DELETE in transactions during dev so they can ROLLBACK if WHERE was wrong.

How many rows one statement touches is a design decision, not an implementation detail. A single DELETE covering a year of history is one transaction: it holds its locks until it commits, and nothing in the log can be reused until it ends.
sequel Server also escalates: Microsoft Learn's Transaction locking and row versioning guide gives the trigger as a single statement acquiring at least 5,000 locks on one non-partitioned table or index (and re-attempting every 1,250 new locks if the first attempt is blocked),
at which point row locks become a table lock and readers of unrelated rows start waiting.

The fix is to keep the work set-based but bound each transaction:

Each batch is still set-based, the loop is around statements, not rows.

In the real world: a retention job deletes a year of shipped orders as one statement, at 02:00, and for two years nobody notices.
Then the table is big enough that the delete escalates to a table lock, and the job stops being "removing rows nobody reads" and becomes "the orders table is unavailable", checkout included, because the night shift in another region was placing orders.
The log also grows for the whole run, since none of it can be reused until the statement commits. Rewritten as batches of a few thousand rows, each committing, the same predicate deletes the same rows with the site up.
Nothing about the work changed; what changed is how long a single transaction held what it held.

A DML statement can hand back the rows it touched. Going back for them with a follow-up SELECT is a second round trip and a different point in time, between the two statements someone else can change what you are about to read.

Three things to know before relying on them:

OUTPUT exposes both sides of the change. The INSERTED and DELETED pseudo-tables mean one UPDATE can return the before and after values, that is how an audit row gets written without a trigger.
Postgres Q L only caught up in 18, which added the old / new aliases: "Previously RETURNING only returned new values for INSERT and UPDATE, and old values for DELETE " (Postgres Q L 18 release notes). On 17 and earlier, RETURNING.
old.col errors out ( old is not a known table reference) and the before-image has to come from a C T E or a trigger.
** LAST_INSERT_ID() returns the first id of a multi-row insert, not the last.** The MySQL manual is blunt:
"If you insert multiple rows using a single INSERT statement, LAST_INSERT_ID() returns the value generated for the first inserted row only." It is also maintained "on a per-connection basis", which is what makes it safe under concurrency and useless across connections.
sequel Server restricts OUTPUT around triggers. "If the OUTPUT clause is specified without also specifying the INTO keyword, the target of the DML operation can't have any enabled trigger defined on it for the given DML action." And the OUTPUT.
INTO target table itself "can't have enabled triggers defined on it", "participate on either side of a FOREIGN KEY constraint", or "have CHECK constraints or enabled rules", which rules out most real tables and is why the destination is usually a table variable or temp table.

In the real world: a service upgrades from E F Core 6 to 7, changes no code and no schema, and SaveChanges starts throwing on exactly the tables that carry legacy audit triggers.
EF 7's sequel Server provider switched to an OUTPUT -based save path, and sequel Server refuses OUTPUT without INTO on a table with an enabled trigger for that action, a constraint from the database that surfaced as an O R M upgrade bug.
Microsoft documents the escape as a per-entity opt-out: ToTable(tb goes to tb.HasTrigger("SomeTrigger")) in EF 7, ToTable(tb goes to tb.UseSqlOutputClause(false)) from EF 8, which reverts that entity to the older save technique.
The lesson worth carrying is that "the O R M changed" and "the database has a rule about this" are frequently the same incident.

The rows-affected count is a result, not a log line. Every client hands it back, SqlCommand.ExecuteNonQuery() returns it, @@ROWCOUNT exposes it in T sequel, ROW_COUNT() in MySQL, and putting the value you expect to find into the WHERE clause turns an ordinary UPDATE into a compare-and-swap:

Without the version predicate, two users who both loaded the order at 10:00 and both saved at 10:05 each "succeed", and the second silently discards the first, the lost update. The predicate does not prevent the race. It detects it, which is the whole of what optimistic concurrency promises.

This is precisely what E F Core does with a concurrency token, and its documentation describes the mechanism in those terms: EF adds the token to the WHERE clause, and "if a concurrent update occurred, the UPDATE fails to find any matching rows and reports that zero were affected.
As a result, E F Core's SaveChanges() throws a DbUpdateConcurrencyException ". A sequel Server rowversion column mapped with [Timestamp] is the no-effort version of the same idea, because the database bumps it on every change and you can't forget to.

One trap this creates: after a bulk statement such as UPDATE. WHERE status = 'Paid', zero rows affected means "nothing matched", which is neither an error nor a conflict. Only when the WHERE identifies exactly one row by key does zero mean "someone beat me to it".

"Insert it if it isn't there" is a race unless the database arbitrates it. The shape everybody writes first,.

, has a window between the check and the insert in which another connection can insert the same key. Nothing in application code closes that window. The unique index is the only component that can adjudicate two simultaneous inserts, and it adjudicates by raising a duplicate-key error on the loser.
So either handle that error deliberately, or use the engine's atomic form:

What separates these three in an interview:

Postgres Q L requires a conflict target for DO UPDATE, and it must be inferable from a unique index or constraint, the atomicity comes from that index, not from the keyword. The row you tried to insert is available as EXCLUDED.
MySQL reacts to a collision on any unique key on the table, not only the one you had in mind, so a row that clashes on an unrelated unique column is updated rather than rejected.
The affected-rows count tells you which branch ran: "1 if the row is inserted as a new row, 2 if an existing row is updated, 0 if an existing row is set to its current values".
Refer to the proposed values through a row alias ( AS new ); the older VALUES() function is "deprecated and subject to removal in a future version of MySQL".
sequel Server does not make MERGE atomic for you. Microsoft Learn: "In some scenarios where unique keys are expected to be both inserted and updated by the MERGE, specifying the HOLDLOCK will prevent against unique key violations", HOLDLOCK being a synonym for SERIALIZABLE.
The same page warns that "At scale, MERGE might introduce complicated concurrency issues or require advanced troubleshooting", and that where heavy concurrency is expected "separate INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE logic might perform better, with less blocking, than a MERGE statement".
Knowing that MERGE needs HOLDLOCK is a reliable senior signal, because it means you have hit the problem rather than read the syntax.

In the real world: a price-import job does SELECT -then- INSERT per SKU, and the day the vendor starts delivering the feed on two threads it begins failing a handful of rows per run with duplicate-key errors.
The first fix is a retry, which converts the errors into a slower job that still occasionally persists the older of two concurrent updates, because the retry re-reads and re-decides from scratch.
The unique index on sku had been doing its job throughout, it is the only thing in the system that can settle two simultaneous inserts, and the application was asking it, via SELECT, a question it cannot answer atomically. Rewritten as a single INSERT.
ON CONFLICT (sku) DO UPDATE, the same feed on the same two threads produced no errors and no lost updates, because the decision now happens inside the statement holding the index entry.

-- pause --
Filtering with WHERE.

Performance tip: LIKE 'A%' (no leading wildcard) can use a B-tree index, because a prefix is a range: everything from 'A' up to the next letter sits contiguously in the index. LIKE '%A%' cannot, there is no range that contains "has an A somewhere", so every row must be examined.
For substring search on big tables, use full-text search ( CONTAINS in sequel Server, tsvector in Postgres Q L) or a trigram index ( pg_trgm ).

One engine caveat that costs people an afternoon: in Postgres Q L a plain B-tree index only serves LIKE 'A%' if the database uses the C locale.
The docs put it as a condition on the optimizer's use of a B-tree for LIKE: "if your database does not use the C locale you will need to create the index with a special operator class" (Index Types). That class is text_pattern_ops / varchar_pattern_ops, CREATE INDEX.
ON customers (name text_pattern_ops), which compares "strictly character by character rather than according to the locale-specific collation rules", so a prefix is a clean range again.
Note the trade-off the operator-class page states: you should "also create an index with the default operator class if you want queries involving ordinary, or >= comparisons to use an index", because those "cannot use the xxx_pattern_ops operator classes", two indexes on one column.

In the real world: an internal admin search box runs WHERE customer_name LIKE '%' + @q + '%' against the live orders database and fires on every keystroke.
It was written when the customer table was small and stayed correct forever, it just quietly became the top C P U consumer in the plan cache, which nobody looked at because "search" was not on anyone's list of expensive features.
The permanent fix was a full-text index; the fix that bought the afternoon was requiring three characters before searching and anchoring the pattern to a prefix.

AND in sequel is not and and in C sharp: there is no guaranteed evaluation order and no left-to-right short-circuit. In C sharp, a != null and and a.Length > 0 is safe because the language defines the order. sequel defines no such thing, and both engines say so in their own words.

Postgres Q L, Expression Evaluation Rules: "The order of evaluation of subexpressions is not defined. It is particularly dangerous to rely on side effects or evaluation order in WHERE and HAVING clauses, since those clauses are extensively reprocessed as part of developing an execution plan.
Boolean expressions ( AND / OR / NOT combinations) in those clauses can be reorganized in any manner allowed by the laws of Boolean algebra." Its worked example is the division-by-zero guard everyone has written:

The same docs add the better answer wherever one exists, rewrite the predicate so no guard is needed at all, here y > 1.5*x, because forcing order with CASE also blocks the optimizer from reordering for speed.

sequel Server behaves the same way.
Its archived engineering post Predicate ordering is not guaranteed (2006) walks through a view that filters WHERE category = 'ID' and casts a varchar column to int;
querying that view by the cast column raises a conversion error, because " ID = 123 is expanded into convert(int, value) = 123, and it gets evaluated before the predicate category = 'ID' ".
The conclusion has not aged: "the order of evaluation for predicates is never guaranteed, so application logic should not depend on such order." The post's fix is the same CASE expression;
on sequel Server 2012 and later the tidier one is TRY_CONVERT / TRY_CAST, which "returns a value cast to the specified data type if the cast succeeds; otherwise, returns NULL " instead of raising.

Note what the post itself observes: the error appeared on sequel Server 2000 and not on 2005, because the optimizer happened to pick the other order. A predicate order that works is a property of one plan, not of your query, and plans change when statistics, indexes or the engine version change.

In the real world: a settings table keeps every value in one value VARCHAR(50) column with a data_type discriminator, and WHERE data_type = 'int' AND CAST(value AS INT) > 100 has worked for three years.
Someone adds an index for an unrelated report, the plan changes, the cast now runs against rows the type filter used to remove first, and the query starts failing on data nobody touched. The defect was present from the day it was written; the new index only chose a plan that exposed it.
TRY_CAST got results flowing again within the hour, and the durable fix was a typed column, because the query was relying on a correlation between two columns that the optimizer has no way to know about.

-- pause --
Sorting and limiting.

Where NULLs land is not standard, and the NULLS FIRST / NULLS LAST syntax that would let you say what you mean is not available everywhere:

sequel Server, NULLs first, "NULL values are treated as the lowest possible values" (Microsoft Learn, ORDER BY clause), Not supported; emulate with ORDER BY CASE WHEN col IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END, col.
Postgres Q L, NULLs last, "null values sort as if larger than any non-null value", Supported.
MySQL, NULLs first, "NULL values are presented first if you do ORDER BY. ASC", Not supported; ORDER BY col IS NULL, col is the idiom.

Port a query between engines and the same ORDER BY. LIMIT 10 can return a page of NULLs instead of a page of data.

For pagination beyond a few thousand rows, prefer cursor-based ( WHERE id < last_seen_id ), see A P I Design Principles. OFFSET requires the DB to skip rows physically; gets slower as offset grows.

Whichever style you use, the sort must be deterministic or the pages overlap.
Microsoft's guidance on OFFSET / FETCH states the conditions for stable results plainly:
the underlying data must not change between page requests (or all pages must run in one snapshot or serializable transaction), and the ORDER BY must contain "a column or combination of columns that are guaranteed to be unique".
A tiebreaker on the primary key is the cheap half of that. Note also that in sequel Server OFFSET / FETCH is part of the ORDER BY clause, it is a syntax error without one, which is the engine forcing you to at least name a sort.

In the real world: a support tool pages an order list newest-first on created_at, and agents keep reporting orders that appear on two consecutive pages while others never appear at all.
Orders imported in the same batch share a timestamp to the second, so the sort is ambiguous, and every page is a separate query free to break the tie a different way, nothing is broken and nothing reproduces on a developer machine with forty rows in the table.
ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC closed three tickets that had already been marked "cannot reproduce".

An ORDER BY inside a view, derived table or subquery does not survive into the outer query.
Microsoft Learn states the rule and its exception together: "The ORDER BY clause isn't valid in views, inline functions, derived tables, and subqueries, unless you also specify either the TOP or OFFSET and FETCH clauses.
When you use ORDER BY in these objects, the clause is used only to determine the rows returned by the TOP clause or OFFSET and FETCH clauses. The ORDER BY clause doesn't guarantee ordered results when these constructs are queried, unless ORDER BY is also specified in the query itself."

That exception is what makes CREATE VIEW. AS SELECT TOP 100 PERCENT. ORDER BY. such a durable piece of folklore: it is legal, it looks like it pre-sorts the view, and the sort is free to disappear the moment the outer query gets a plan that doesn't need it.
Sort in the statement that returns rows to the client, every time. The same page also notes that an ORDER BY on an INSERT. SELECT "doesn't guarantee the rows are inserted in the specified order", worth knowing before you try to control identity assignment by sorting the source.

-- pause --
DISTINCT.

Removes duplicates from the result.

DISTINCT is a sort or hash operation under the hood, has cost. If you're applying it to every query "just in case," investigate why duplicates exist; often there's a join you can fix.

COUNT(DISTINCT col) counts unique values:

NULLs behave differently in the two.
SELECT DISTINCT country returns NULL as one of the rows, for deduplication and grouping, two NULLs are treated as the same value, even though NULL = NULL is UNKNOWN everywhere else (MySQL's manual states the grouping rule directly: "Two NULL values are regarded as equal in a GROUP BY").
COUNT(DISTINCT country) skips NULL entirely, because it is an aggregate and aggregates ignore NULL inputs. So the number of rows from the first query and the number from the second can legitimately differ by one, and "our country count is off by one" has caught out more than one dashboard.

In the real world: a revenue-by-region report starts showing every order twice after a join is added to customer_addresses, where a customer can have both a billing and a shipping row. DISTINCT goes on the detail query, the row count looks right again, and it ships.
The duplicated rows were never the defect, the join produced two copies of each order, and the summary query built on the same join keeps SUM(total) counting each order twice, which DISTINCT on a different query does nothing about. Finance found it weeks later.
The fix was to collapse addresses to one row per customer before joining; DISTINCT had only removed the symptom that would have led someone to the join.

-- pause --
NULL semantics.

NULL means "unknown." It doesn't mean zero, empty string, or false. The big surprises:

Two notes on running those probes yourself. The bare SELECT NULL = NULL; lines work in Postgres Q L, which has a real boolean type, and in MySQL, which returns a comparison as 1 / 0 / NULL (its BOOL / BOOLEAN are synonyms for TINYINT(1), not a distinct type).
T sequel has no boolean data type at all, so in sequel Server you need to wrap the comparison: SELECT CASE WHEN NULL = NULL THEN 'true' ELSE 'not true' END; (it prints not true, because UNKNOWN is not TRUE).
And if you meet a legacy sequel Server codebase where = NULL appears to work, that is SET ANSI_NULLS OFF, under which {expression} = NULL evaluates to TRUE when the expression is NULL.
It is deprecated and, per Microsoft Learn, "starting with sequel Server 2017 (14.x), ANSI_NULLS is always set to ON", so that code is on borrowed time.

Every construct handles UNKNOWN, and they don't agree. This one table explains most NULL surprises:

WHERE, HAVING, join ON, maps to, Keeps the row only when the predicate is TRUE. UNKNOWN drops it, same outcome as FALSE, different meaning.
CHECK constraint, maps to, Rejects the row only when the predicate is FALSE. UNKNOWN passes. The exact opposite default to WHERE.
UNIQUE, maps to, Standard: NULLs are distinct, so duplicates of NULL are allowed. sequel Server allows only one; Postgres Q L 15+ can opt in with NULLS NOT DISTINCT.
GROUP BY, DISTINCT, UNION, maps to, NULLs are treated as equal and collapse into a single group or row.
ORDER BY, maps to, NULLs sort first in sequel Server and MySQL, last in Postgres Q L (ascending).
Aggregates, maps to, Ignore NULL inputs. COUNT(*) counts rows; COUNT(col) counts non-NULLs; SUM of all-NULL is NULL, not 0.
NOT IN (subquery), maps to, One NULL in the subquery makes the whole predicate UNKNOWN, zero rows, always. Use NOT EXISTS.

NULL handling is the source of countless bugs. When designing a column, decide deliberately: should it allow NULL, or should it default? NOT NULL DEFAULT 0 avoids the entire NULL category at the cost of conflating "zero" and "unknown."

In the real world: a nightly job emails customers who have not ordered in a year, selected with WHERE customer_id NOT IN (SELECT customer_id FROM recent_orders).
It runs fine for months and then sends nothing, and sends nothing silently, because "no customers matched" is an ordinary result and the job exits successfully.
A release had made recent_orders.customer_id nullable to support guest checkout, one NULL arrived, and NOT IN over a list containing NULL can never be TRUE for any row. It surfaced through a marketing report, not through monitoring.
NOT EXISTS would have kept working unchanged; so would WHERE customer_id IS NOT NULL inside the subquery.

When you genuinely want "same value, NULLs included", there is a predicate for that. Change detection written as WHERE old.email <> new.email silently skips every row where one side is NULL, so a column being cleared or first populated does not register as a change.
The standard's answer is IS DISTINCT FROM, which always returns TRUE or FALSE and never UNKNOWN:

Postgres Q L, a IS [NOT] DISTINCT FROM b, Long-standing.
sequel Server, a IS [NOT] DISTINCT FROM b, sequel Server 2022 (16.x) and Azure sequel Database. Earlier versions need the expansion.
MySQL, a b, NULL-safe equal. The manual notes it "is equivalent to the standard sequel IS NOT DISTINCT FROM operator", Long-standing.

Microsoft Learn's truth table is the clearest statement of what changes:

0, 0, True, True.
0, 1, False, False.
0, NULL, Unknown, False.
NULL, NULL, Unknown, True.

On sequel Server 2019 and earlier, the portable rewrite is the one the docs themselves generate when sending the predicate to a linked server that can't parse the syntax: A IS NOT DISTINCT FROM B becomes (NOT (A <> B OR A IS NULL OR B IS NULL) OR (A IS NULL AND B IS NULL)).
The commonly-seen shortcut COALESCE(a, '~') = COALESCE(b, '~') works only while the sentinel can never be a real value, and it wraps the column in a function, so the index goes too.

-- pause --
Implicit conversion, the index that stops being used.

Every comparison has two sides and they have to end up the same type. When they don't, the engine converts one of them, and which side it converts decides whether your index is still usable. This is the most common way a dot NET application breaks its own indexes without changing a line of sequel.

sequel Server decides by data type precedence: "the data type with the lower precedence is first converted to the data type with the higher precedence" (Microsoft Learn, Data type precedence (Transact-sequel)).
The relevant slice of that list, higher first: bigint to int to. to nvarchar to nchar to varchar to char. Two cases fall out of it:

Only the second one hurts. Converting a constant happens once, before the scan starts. Converting a column happens per row, and once the indexed column is wrapped in a function the engine can no longer match it against the keys stored in the index, a seek becomes a scan.
The plan shows exactly this: the predicate reads CONVERT_IMPLICIT(nvarchar(50),[sku],0)=[@p0] and sequel Server attaches a warning that the type conversion may affect the cardinality estimate.

The reason this hits dot NET specifically is that both mainstream data-access libraries default to Unicode parameters:

E F Core (sequel Server), nvarchar(max), or nvarchar(450) for a key column, IsUnicode(false) / [Unicode(false)], or HasColumnType("varchar(50)").
Dapper, DbType.String to nvarchar, new DbString { Value = sku, IsAnsi = true, Length = 50 }.

The rule: the model and the column must agree. A varchar column queried through an nvarchar parameter is a mismatch that never raises an error, it only spends C P U.

Other engines arrive at different places:

Postgres Q L mostly refuses to guess. WHERE sku = 42 against a varchar column raises operator does not exist: character varying = integer; you get an error instead of a silent scan. A quoted literal is untyped and takes the column's type, so WHERE order_id = '4711' on an integer column is fine.
There is no nvarchar, text and varchar are stored the same way in the same database encoding, so there is no Unicode-versus-ANSI mismatch to create.
MySQL is the one to watch. "For comparisons of a string column with a number, MySQL cannot use an index on the column to look up the value quickly", because many strings convert to the same number (MySQL 8.4 manual, Type Conversion in Expression Evaluation).
Worse, the comparison is done as floating-point numbers, so WHERE varchar_col = 0 matches every row whose text converts to zero, anything without a leading number,
which in the manual's own worked example is all five rows of fruit names, and the manual notes that "this occurs even when using strict sequel mode".
Quote the literal ( = '0' ) and it compares as a string again.

In the real world: a sku VARCHAR(32) lookup has been served by an index for years. A team ports the query from Dapper to E F Core, changes no sequel, and the endpoint starts timing out under ordinary traffic.
The entity's string property mapped to nvarchar, nvarchar outranks varchar in the precedence list, and so the engine converted the column on every row rather than the parameter once. IsUnicode(false) on the property put the seek back.
The tell was visible in the plan cache from the first deploy, a CONVERT_IMPLICIT wrapped around a column somebody had deliberately indexed, which is worth knowing because the incident looks like a capacity problem right up until you read the plan.

-- pause --
Set-based thinking.

The C sharp instinct is to fetch rows and loop. sequel asks you to describe the result and let the optimizer choose how to get there, and the moment you write the loop yourself, you have taken that choice away from it permanently.
A cursor (or a foreach in application code issuing one statement per row) commits the engine to nested-loop-shaped work: no hash join, no parallel scan, no read-ahead over a range, one plan execution and one set of locks per row, and a round trip per row if the loop is in your process.

The same job, three ways:

The aggregate always goes in a derived table or C T E, an UPDATE cannot carry its own GROUP BY. The dialects differ only in shape: sequel Server updates an alias declared in a FROM, Postgres Q L uses SET. FROM. WHERE, MySQL puts the join before SET.
All three send one statement, and all three let the optimizer pick the join strategy.

Set-based is not the same as "unbounded". A statement touching millions of rows is one transaction holding one set of locks, which is the problem the batched delete solves.
The correct shape for large maintenance work is a loop around set-based batches: procedural at the top, set-based inside, each batch its own transaction.

Loops are still right when the work genuinely is per row and has an outside effect, calling a payment provider, sending a message, anything that can't be expressed as a single result set. That belongs in application code, not in a cursor.

On the dot NET side, the same principle has a name: N plus one. link that materializes a list and then touches a navigation property per element issues one query per row, which is the loop written by accident, see E F Core and link.
E F Core 7 added ExecuteUpdateAsync / ExecuteDeleteAsync, which emit one set-based statement instead of loading entities and saving them back.

In the real world: a monthly statement job loads every active customer, loops in C sharp, and calls SaveChanges() inside the loop.
It fits the maintenance window in year one and overruns it in year three, at which point someone kills it, leaving the month half-processed, because each iteration committed on its own and there is no single thing to roll back.
Rewritten as one UPDATE. FROM against a staging table it finished inside the window, but the reason the on-call rota cared was the other half:
as one statement it either completes or it doesn't, and "run it again" became a safe instruction instead of a question about which customers were already done.

-- pause --
TRUNCATE versus DELETE versus DROP.

DELETE is DML: it removes rows one at a time, logs each one, fires row triggers, respects WHERE, and participates in your transaction like any other statement. TRUNCATE removes every row by deallocating the pages, the log records the deallocations, not the rows.
DROP TABLE removes the definition as well.

The interview question is "DELETE versus TRUNCATE"; the senior answer is that TRUNCATE's behaviour is engine-specific in the four ways that matter operationally:

Rollback, Yes, "a TRUNCATE TABLE operation can be rolled back within a transaction", Yes, "transaction-safe with respect to the data in the tables", No, "truncate operations cause an implicit commit, and so cannot be rolled back".
Identity / sequence, Reset to the seed value, Unchanged unless you write RESTART IDENTITY ( CONTINUE IDENTITY is the default), AUTO_INCREMENT reset to its start value.
Foreign keys, Refused if the table is referenced by an FK constraint, even when the child table is empty, Refused unless every referencing table is truncated in the same statement, or you pass CASCADE, Refused if other tables have FK constraints referencing it.
Triggers, Cannot fire triggers (no per-row logging), Does not fire ON DELETE triggers, but does fire ON TRUNCATE triggers, Does not invoke ON DELETE triggers.

(Sources: the TRUNCATE TABLE reference pages for each engine, see Sources.)

Two more things people learn the hard way:

TRUNCATE is not a low-impact operation, it is a short one. sequel Server "always locks the table (including a schema ( SCH-M ) lock)"; Postgres Q L "acquires an ACCESS EXCLUSIVE lock on each table it operates on, which blocks all other concurrent operations".
Fast, but exclusive, if you need the table to stay readable, DELETE is the tool.
The permission is different. In sequel Server, TRUNCATE TABLE needs ALTER on the table, not DELETE. Application service accounts usually don't have it, which is why a cleanup routine that works on a developer's box fails in production.

Also worth knowing: sequel Server refuses to truncate tables published for transactional or merge replication, participating in an indexed view, or system-versioned (temporal), use DELETE there.

In the real world: an integration-test harness resets fixtures with TRUNCATE TABLE staging_orders inside the transaction it rolls back after each test. That works on sequel Server and Postgres Q L, where truncation is transactional.
Ported to MySQL to support a second database, the suite starts leaking rows between tests and failing in a different order every run:
on MySQL, TRUNCATE is DDL and commits implicitly, so the rollback at the end of the test has nothing left to undo, and the implicit commit also ended the transaction everything else in the test was relying on.
The fix was DELETE FROM in the harness, which is slower per test and correct on all three.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

-- pause --
Logical execution order (with example).

Mental model:
Build cross-product / join input rows.
Apply WHERE, drop rows.
Apply GROUP BY, collapse remaining rows by group key.
Apply HAVING, drop groups.
Compute SELECT columns (aggregates already exist from step 3).
Apply DISTINCT if specified.
Sort.
Paginate.

This is why WHERE country = (SELECT MAX(country) FROM.) works but WHERE customers > 100 doesn't (the customers alias from SELECT doesn't exist yet at step 2).

-- pause --
Constraint cascade, visualizing FK behavior.

Pick by domain:
Cascade for child rows that have no meaning without the parent (line items of a deleted order).
Set NULL if children can survive without the parent (orders where customer was anonymized).
Restrict when manual intervention is required (financial records).

-- pause --
Worked plan, the same filter, with and without its index.

Plans are shown as operator shape only; costs and row estimates are elided because they depend on your data.

Postgres Q L, a function wrapped around the column. EXPLAIN on the two forms of "orders created on 8 May":

Read the operator names first, then the line under them. Filter: means "rows arrived and were then thrown away". Index Cond: means "the index was used to decide which rows to fetch at all". That distinction is the whole of query tuning at this level.

sequel Server, the conversion is on the wrong side. Same query, same index; the only difference is the declared type of the parameter:

Which side gets converted is the whole story:

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

UPDATE / DELETE without WHERE. Updates / deletes the entire table. Always test with SELECT first; consider wrapping in BEGIN / COMMIT.
* SELECT in production code.** Slows queries; breaks when columns added; couples to schema. List columns explicitly.
= NULL instead of IS NULL. Always returns 0 rows. NULL never equals anything, including itself.
Implicit type conversion in WHERE. The damage depends on which side converts, not on the mismatch itself. In sequel Server int outranks varchar, so WHERE int_col = '123' converts the literal once and still seeks; WHERE varchar_col = @nvarchar_param converts the column on every row and scans.
Match the parameter type to the column type in the O R M mapping, see Implicit conversion.
LIKE '%X%'. Leading wildcard prevents index use. Use full-text search if you need substring queries on large tables.
No ORDER BY on paginated queries. Without ORDER BY, "page 2" might return overlapping rows with "page 1." Always sort by a stable key.
DISTINCT to mask join bugs. Slap DISTINCT on a query returning duplicates, but the duplicates are the symptom of a wrong join. Fix the join.
Storing money as FLOAT. Floating-point rounding errors. Use DECIMAL(18, 2) (or vendor equivalent).
Storing local times. Always store UTC; convert at the edge. Time zones are a nightmare otherwise.
Forgetting NOT NULL defaults to nullable. Most columns should be NOT NULL. Default to NOT NULL; allow NULL explicitly when it has meaning.
No primary key. Every table needs one (even with surrogate INT IDENTITY / BIGSERIAL ). PK is the basis of indexing, replication, O R M mapping.
Schema-less columns of TEXT for "future flexibility." Untyped data to uncatchable bugs. Define types up front; alter later if needed.
Expecting a CHECK to keep NULLs out. A CHECK rejects only what evaluates to FALSE; NULL makes the predicate UNKNOWN, which passes. Add NOT NULL when you mean it.
Assuming TRUNCATE is rollback-able. It is on sequel Server and Postgres Q L; on MySQL it is DDL and commits implicitly, taking your open transaction with it.
Foreign key without an index on the child column. sequel Server and Postgres Q L don't create one (MySQL does). Parent deletes and key updates then scan the child table.
One enormous DELETE / UPDATE instead of batches. One statement, one transaction, one lock set held to the end, and on sequel Server a candidate for escalation to a table lock. Loop around set-based batches instead.
Sorting a paginated query on a non-unique column. Ambiguous order means pages can overlap or skip. Always add a unique tiebreaker ( ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC ).
Integer division in a percentage or ratio. sequel Server and Postgres Q L truncate integer divided by integer; sequel Server's AVG over an int column returns an int. Widen an operand before the arithmetic ( x * 1.0 / y ), not after. MySQL's / is fractional, the trap moves rather than disappearing.
Assuming AND short-circuits left to right. It doesn't, in any engine. A guard predicate ( WHERE x > 0 AND y or x > 1.5 ) is not a guard. Use CASE, TRY_CAST, or rewrite the condition so no guard is needed.
SELECT -then- INSERT as an upsert. The gap between the two statements is a race no application code can close. Use ON CONFLICT (Postgres Q L), ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE (MySQL), or MERGE WITH (HOLDLOCK) (sequel Server), and rely on the unique index, which is what actually arbitrates.
Trusting a constraint you added with WITH NOCHECK / NOT VALID. It governs new rows only until you validate it, and sequel Server's optimizer ignores it entirely while it is untrusted.
ORDER BY inside a view or subquery. It does not survive into the outer query. Sort in the statement that returns rows to the client.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Five sublanguages: DDL (define), DML (modify), DQL (query), DCL (permissions), TCL (transactions).
crud verbs: SELECT / INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE.
Always WHERE on UPDATE or DELETE. Wrap in transactions during development.
Logical execution order: FROM to WHERE to GROUP BY to HAVING to SELECT to DISTINCT to ORDER BY to LIMIT.
NULL is "unknown" with three-valued logic. Use IS NULL, never = NULL.
Constraints: PRIMARY KEY, FOREIGN KEY, UNIQUE, NOT NULL, CHECK, DEFAULT.
Data types chosen for purpose: DECIMAL(18,2) for money, TIMESTAMPTZ / DATETIMEOFFSET for time-zone-aware times, VARCHAR(n) with sensible cap for strings, INT / BIGINT for IDs.
Constraints are three-valued too: WHERE keeps only TRUE, CHECK rejects only FALSE. UNKNOWN passes a CHECK and fails a WHERE.
Type mismatches move the conversion, not the meaning: the lower-precedence side converts. When that side is your indexed column, the seek is gone.
Set-based by default, with a loop only around batches, the loop is a transaction-size tool, not a way to process rows.
DML can return its own rows: OUTPUT (sequel Server, with INSERTED / DELETED ), RETURNING (Postgres Q L), neither in MySQL. One statement instead of two, and no window in between.
Rows affected is the concurrency primitive. WHERE id = @id AND version = @expected plus a rows-affected check is compare-and-swap, and is exactly what E F Core's concurrency token does.
Upsert belongs to the unique index, not to the application: ON CONFLICT, ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE, or MERGE WITH (HOLDLOCK).
No evaluation order in WHERE. AND is not and and; only CASE fixes the order, and rewriting the predicate is usually better.

Expected interview questions:

"Difference between WHERE and HAVING?", WHERE filters rows before grouping. HAVING filters groups after aggregation. Aggregate functions can only appear in HAVING (or SELECT).
"What's the logical execution order of a SELECT?", FROM to WHERE to GROUP BY to HAVING to SELECT to DISTINCT to ORDER BY to LIMIT. (Written order versus evaluated order differs.)
" NULL = NULL, what does it return?", NULL, not TRUE. Use IS NULL to check.
"Why is LIKE '%X%' slow?", Leading wildcard means the DB can't use a B-tree index on the column. Must scan every row. Use full-text search for substring needs.
"DELETE versus TRUNCATE?", DELETE removes rows (logs each, can WHERE-filter, fires triggers). TRUNCATE deallocates the entire table's pages (faster, can't filter, can't fire row triggers, sometimes blocked by replication).
"FLOAT versus DECIMAL for money?", DECIMAL, exact, no rounding errors. FLOAT loses precision ( 0.1 + 0.2 = 0.30000000000000004 ).
"Should every column be NOT NULL?", No, but default to NOT NULL. Allow NULL only when it carries meaning (truly unknown versus a sentinel value). Each NULL column doubles your branching code.
"Your query has an index on the column and still scans. Name three reasons.", A function or cast wrapped around the column; a leading wildcard in LIKE; an implicit conversion of the column caused by a mismatched parameter type ( nvarchar parameter against a varchar column in sequel Server).
Fourth if they want one: the optimizer decided the range is large enough that a scan is cheaper, which is a correct decision, not a bug.
"Does a CHECK constraint stop NULLs?", No. A CHECK rejects only what evaluates to FALSE; a NULL operand makes the expression UNKNOWN, which passes. You need NOT NULL as well.
"Can you roll back a TRUNCATE ?", On sequel Server and Postgres Q L, yes, inside a transaction. On MySQL, no: it is DDL and causes an implicit commit.
Follow-up worth volunteering: it also resets identity/ AUTO_INCREMENT on sequel Server and MySQL, while Postgres Q L leaves the sequence alone unless you say RESTART IDENTITY.
"Does creating a foreign key create an index?", On the child column, only in MySQL or InnoDB, which requires one and creates it for you.
sequel Server, Postgres Q L and Oracle index the referenced (parent) side because it's a PK or UNIQUE, and leave the referencing column to you, so parent deletes scan the child table until you add it.
"Two users open the same order and both save. How do you stop the second from silently overwriting the first?", Put the value you read into the WHERE clause ( WHERE id = @id AND version = @expected ) and check rows affected: 1 means you won, 0 means someone changed it first.
That's optimistic concurrency, it detects the conflict rather than preventing it. E F Core does exactly this with a concurrency token and turns the 0-row result into DbUpdateConcurrencyException; on sequel Server a rowversion column with [Timestamp] gets you the token for free.
"How do you write an upsert, and why isn't check-then-insert good enough?", Check-then-insert has a window between the two statements in which another connection can insert the same key; only the unique index can settle that, and it settles it with a duplicate-key error. Atomic forms: INSERT.
ON CONFLICT (col) DO UPDATE (Postgres Q L), INSERT. ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE (MySQL, which fires on any unique key collision), MERGE with HOLDLOCK on sequel Server, Microsoft's own docs say HOLDLOCK is what prevents unique-key violations when a MERGE both inserts and updates the same keys.
"Does WHERE a > 0 AND b or a > 1.5 protect you from divide-by-zero?", No. Predicate evaluation order is undefined in every engine; Postgres Q L's docs call this exact query "untrustworthy" and sequel Server's guidance is that "the order of evaluation for predicates is never guaranteed".
CASE is the one construct with a defined order; TRY_CAST / TRY_CONVERT handles the conversion variant on sequel Server 2012+; best of all, rewrite it as b > 1.5*a so there is nothing to guard.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, DDL versus DML versus DCL versus TCL.

Q: Name the five sequel sublanguages and one statement each.-- think --

A: DDL (Data Definition), CREATE, ALTER, DROP. DML (Data Manipulation), INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE. DQL (Data Query), SELECT. DCL (Data Control), GRANT, REVOKE. TCL (Transaction Control), BEGIN, COMMIT, ROLLBACK.

Cross-Q: Which of these auto-commit and which require explicit transaction handling?-- think --

A: DDL auto-commits in most engines, CREATE TABLE, ALTER TABLE, DROP end any open transaction implicitly in MySQL and Oracle. Postgres Q L is the exception: DDL is fully transactional, so you can BEGIN, run ALTER TABLE, and ROLLBACK.
DML is transaction-controlled, you start a transaction with BEGIN, run inserts or updates, then COMMIT or ROLLBACK. DCL ( GRANT / REVOKE ) is typically auto-committed and not safely rolled back.
sequel Server splits the difference: most DDL is transactional but some ( CREATE DATABASE, BACKUP ) is not.

Cross-Q²: Why does it matter that DDL auto-commits in MySQL but not Postgres Q L?-- think --

A: Migration safety. In Postgres Q L, you can wrap a complex migration ( ALTER TABLE, data backfill, CREATE INDEX ) in a single transaction; if any step fails, the whole change rolls back atomically, schema and data stay consistent.
In MySQL, each DDL statement commits; a half-completed migration leaves the database in a partial state. This is why Postgres Q L is often preferred for blue-green migrations, and why MySQL migrations need careful step-by-step idempotency design.

-- pause --
Drill 2, NULL semantics.

Q: What does WHERE Status = NULL return?-- think --

A: Zero rows. Status = NULL evaluates to UNKNOWN, not TRUE, regardless of whether Status is actually NULL. Use IS NULL to check for null: WHERE Status IS NULL. Same trap for !=, >, <, LIKE, any comparison with NULL yields UNKNOWN.

Cross-Q: Why three-valued logic and not just NULL = NULL to TRUE ?-- think --

A: NULL means "unknown value" in sequel semantics. Two unknowns can't be proven equal, they might or might not be the same. Returning TRUE would say "yes, these are equal," which is a stronger claim than the data supports.
Three-valued logic (TRUE, FALSE, UNKNOWN) preserves the distinction: equality is unknown, not false. The WHERE clause filters to rows where the predicate is TRUE, so UNKNOWN rows are excluded, that's why = NULL returns zero rows.

Cross-Q²: How does NOT IN (subquery) interact with NULL in the subquery?-- think --

A: Famous gotcha: WHERE x NOT IN (SELECT y FROM t) returns zero rows if any y is NULL. Because x NOT IN (a, b, NULL) is equivalent to x <> a AND x <> b AND x <> NULL, and x <> NULL is UNKNOWN, so the whole expression is UNKNOWN, and the row is filtered out.
Fix: filter NULLs out of the subquery: WHERE x NOT IN (SELECT y FROM t WHERE y IS NOT NULL), or use NOT EXISTS which has cleaner NULL semantics.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Three-valued logic in WHERE.

Q: A WHERE predicate evaluates to UNKNOWN for some rows. Are those rows included or excluded?-- think --

A: Excluded. WHERE keeps rows where the predicate is TRUE; UNKNOWN and FALSE rows are filtered out. This means any predicate involving a column that could be NULL silently drops rows you might expect. To include NULLs, use WHERE expr OR expr IS NULL or WHERE COALESCE(expr,.) =..

Cross-Q: How does HAVING differ from WHERE regarding NULLs?-- think --

A: Same semantics, UNKNOWN excludes the group.
But HAVING runs after grouping, so it operates on aggregate values, where NULL behavior is different: COUNT(*) counts all rows; COUNT(col) counts non-NULLs; SUM(col) ignores NULLs (treats them as zero for the sum, but returns NULL if all values are NULL).
Aggregate functions are NULL-tolerant in a way scalar comparisons aren't.

Cross-Q²: I want "all customers who don't have any active orders." How do I write it correctly?-- think --

A: SELECT * FROM customers c WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM orders o WHERE o.customer_id = c.id AND o.is_active = TRUE). Not WHERE c.id NOT IN (SELECT customer_id FROM orders WHERE is_active = TRUE), if any customer_id is NULL in the subquery, the whole NOT IN returns no rows.
NOT EXISTS is correlated subquery and naturally handles NULLs by ignoring rows where the join predicate is UNKNOWN.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Constraint types.

Q: List the six standard constraint types.-- think --

A: PRIMARY KEY (unique + not null + clustered usually), FOREIGN KEY (references another table's PK or unique key), UNIQUE (alternate keys;
NULLs allowed, exactly one in sequel Server, any number in Postgres Q L and MySQL), CHECK (custom validation expression), NOT NULL (column-level mandatory), DEFAULT (value used when omitted).

Cross-Q: What's the difference between PRIMARY KEY and UNIQUE NOT NULL?-- think --

A: Functionally similar, both enforce uniqueness and prohibit NULL. Differences: (1) only one PRIMARY KEY per table; can have many UNIQUE. (2) PRIMARY KEY is the identity; it's what foreign keys reference and what the engine clusters on by default (sequel Server).
(3) Semantically, PK is the row identity; UNIQUE is an alternate identifier. Use PK for the row's canonical ID, UNIQUE for natural keys like email or username.

Cross-Q²: Can a FOREIGN KEY reference a UNIQUE column instead of a PRIMARY KEY?-- think --

A: Yes, but rare. sequel allows FK to reference any column with a UNIQUE constraint or PRIMARY KEY.
Discouraged because (1) PK is the canonical identifier, if you have a separate FK target, you've introduced two ways to identify the row, (2) FK to UNIQUE is harder to reason about for maintainers, (3) some ORMs (E F Core,
Hibernate) prefer FK-to-PK conventions and need extra config for FK-to-UNIQUE.
Defensible only when the parent table has no integer surrogate PK and you must FK against a natural key.

-- pause --
Drill 5, VARCHAR versus NVARCHAR versus TEXT.

Q: When do you pick VARCHAR over NVARCHAR ?-- think --

A: sequel Server: VARCHAR is 1-byte-per-char (or variable for UTF-8 since 2019); NVARCHAR is 2-byte UTF-16. Use VARCHAR for ASCII-only fields (codes, statuses) to save space; NVARCHAR for any user-facing text that might contain non-ASCII (names, addresses, comments).
Postgres Q L: VARCHAR is already Unicode (UTF-8), no NVARCHAR needed. MySQL: VARCHAR is Unicode if the column's charset is UTF-8; the type itself doesn't dictate encoding.

Cross-Q: What's the trade-off of TEXT versus VARCHAR(MAX) ?-- think --

A: TEXT (legacy in sequel Server, current in Postgres Q L) is unbounded large-object storage. VARCHAR(MAX) (sequel Server, modern) is unbounded but with VARCHAR -like semantics.
In sequel Server, TEXT is deprecated, it has limitations (can't be indexed, requires READTEXT / WRITETEXT for some operations).
Use VARCHAR(MAX) or NVARCHAR(MAX). In Postgres Q L, TEXT and VARCHAR without length spec are identical and idiomatic.

Cross-Q²: How does collation affect string comparisons?-- think --

A: Collation defines how the engine compares and sorts strings, case-sensitivity, accent-sensitivity, kana-sensitivity, width-sensitivity. SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS (sequel Server default) is case-insensitive, accent-sensitive. So 'Hello' = 'HELLO' returns TRUE, but 'café' = 'cafe' returns FALSE.
Picking the wrong collation causes silent bugs: emails should be CI for login lookup, but user-content text fields might want accent-sensitive equality. Postgres Q L uses COLLATE per-column or per-query; MySQL uses character set + collation on the column.

-- pause --
Drill 6, ORDER BY without LIMIT.

Q: SELECT * FROM orders without ORDER BY, what order are rows returned in?-- think --

A: Undefined. The sequel standard doesn't guarantee any order without an explicit ORDER BY.
The engine returns rows in whatever order is most efficient for its execution plan, usually clustered-index order if no joins, but it can change between queries based on index usage, parallelism, or storage engine.

Cross-Q: I have a clustered PK on id. Doesn't SELECT * return in id order then?-- think --

A: Often yes, but not guaranteed. The engine is free to use a covering index, parallel scan, or hash join that returns rows out of clustered order. Production code that assumes implicit order silently breaks when the engine picks a different plan after a stats update or index addition.
Always add ORDER BY id if you need a specific order, the cost is small, the correctness gain is real.

Cross-Q²: What about ORDER BY x where x has duplicates, is the secondary order defined?-- think --

A: No. Rows with the same x value come back in arbitrary order. For deterministic pagination, you must add a tiebreaker: ORDER BY x, id. Without a tiebreaker, LIMIT 10 OFFSET 0 and LIMIT 10 OFFSET 10 can return overlapping or missing rows if the engine re-evaluates order between queries.
This is the classic "pagination shows duplicate items" bug, always include a unique column in ORDER BY for paginated queries.

-- pause --
Drill 7, ANSI sequel versus vendor dialects.

Q: Name three places where sequel Server's T sequel differs from Postgres Q L's PL or pgSQL.-- think --

A: (1) Pagination: sequel Server OFFSET N ROWS FETCH NEXT M ROWS ONLY or TOP M; Postgres Q L LIMIT M OFFSET N. (2) String concatenation: sequel Server + or CONCAT; Postgres Q L ||.
(3) Identity columns: sequel Server IDENTITY(1,1) or INT IDENTITY; Postgres Q L SERIAL (legacy) or GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY (modern, ANSI standard since sequel:2003).

Cross-Q: Why doesn't ANSI standardization fix this?-- think --

A: It does, slowly. sequel:1992 standardized core syntax; sequel:1999 added recursive CTEs; sequel:2003 added window functions and standard identity; sequel:2016 added Jason.
But (1) vendors had pre-existing dialects they couldn't deprecate without breaking customers, (2) some features are inherently vendor-specific (storage engines, partitioning, hints), and (3) optimizers behave differently even on standard syntax.
Cross-vendor sequel is a real cost of multi-database support.

Cross-Q²: How would you write a portable pagination query?-- think --

A: Use the ANSI-standard OFFSET. FETCH syntax, supported by sequel Server (2012+), Postgres Q L (8.4+), Oracle (12c+): SELECT. ORDER BY id OFFSET 20 ROWS FETCH NEXT 10 ROWS ONLY. MySQL still requires LIMIT 10 OFFSET 20.
For maximum portability, use a query builder (Dapper.Contrib, E F Core, Knex.js) that handles dialect mapping. Or accept some duplication and have one query per dialect.

-- pause --
Drill 8, BIT versus BOOLEAN versus INT versus BIGINT.

Q: For a "is_active" flag, what type do you pick in sequel Server versus Postgres Q L?-- think --

A: sequel Server: BIT (0 or 1 or NULL, stored efficiently, multiple BITs share a byte). Postgres Q L: BOOLEAN (TRUE or FALSE or NULL, stored as a byte). Both are the right choice over INT because they encode intent, readers see is_active and know it's a flag, not a count.

Cross-Q: When would you use INT for a flag?-- think --

A: When you might add more states later. status INT with 0 set to draft, 1 set to published, 2 set to archived is more flexible than is_draft BIT, is_published BIT, is_archived BIT. Or use an ENUM (MySQL, Postgres Q L) or a small lookup table ( status_id FK to statuses ).
The mistake is starting with BIT, then needing a third state, and being forced to either add columns or migrate the type.

Cross-Q²: When does INT overflow matter and BIGINT become necessary?-- think --

A: INT is ~2.1 billion.
Approaching this threshold for:
(1) auto-incrementing PKs on high-volume insert tables (event logs, audit trails, IoT data, Twitter's status IDs crossed the signed 32-bit limit in June 2009), (2) counters like Facebook likes globally summed, (3) timestamps in seconds since 1970 ( int32 overflows in 2038, the Y2038 problem;
use BIGINT or TIMESTAMP ).
For most app data (users, orders, products), INT is fine. Migrate proactively when you cross 1B rows to give yourself headroom; the schema change while live is painful.

-- pause --
Drill 9, CHAR versus VARCHAR.

Q: What's the difference between CHAR(10) and VARCHAR(10) ?-- think --

A: CHAR(10) is fixed-length, padded with spaces to 10 characters. 'hi' is stored as 'hi ' (8 trailing spaces). VARCHAR(10) is variable-length, max 10 characters. 'hi' is stored as 2 characters plus a length header.

Cross-Q: How does this affect comparisons?-- think --

A: This is a collation property, not a universal rule, and the engines disagree.
For CHAR(n) the answer is consistent, trailing spaces are ignored, and Postgres Q L says so directly: "Trailing spaces are treated as semantically insignificant and disregarded when comparing two values of type character." For variable-length strings it splits:

| Engine | 'hi' = 'hi ' on a VARCHAR / TEXT column |.
| Postgres Q L | FALSE. "Note that trailing spaces are semantically significant in character varying and text values, and when using pattern matching, that is LIKE and regular expressions." |.
| sequel Server | TRUE, it follows the ANSI or ISO sequel-92 padding rule, padding the shorter string to match before comparing, so 'abc' and 'abc ' are equivalent for most comparisons (Microsoft kilobytes 316626, INF: How sequel Server Compares Strings with Trailing Spaces).
The documented exception is LIKE: when the pattern on the right carries a trailing space, sequel Server does not pad. Note also that SET ANSI_PADDING governs whether trailing blanks are trimmed on insert, it does not change comparison. |.
| MySQL | Depends on the collation's pad attribute.
"For PAD SPACE collations, trailing spaces are insignificant in comparisons" and "Most MySQL collations have a pad attribute of PAD SPACE ", but " NO PAD collations treat trailing spaces as significant in comparisons, like any other character",
and "The Unicode collations based on UCA 9.0.0 and higher have a pad attribute of NO PAD ", which is the utf8mb4_0900_* family introduced in MySQL 8.0.
|.

So the same WHERE code = 'AB ' can match on sequel Server, miss on Postgres Q L, and change behaviour on MySQL when someone modernises a column's collation. Concatenation still reveals the padding everywhere: 'X' || CHAR_COL || 'Y' produces 'Xhi Y' from CHAR(10) but 'XhiY' from VARCHAR(10).
Trim on input rather than relying on comparison semantics you would have to look up.

Cross-Q²: When is CHAR actually the right choice?-- think --

A: Almost never in modern schemas. Two narrow cases: (1) truly fixed-length codes like ISO country codes ( CHAR(2) ), USPS state codes ( CHAR(2) ), MICR routing numbers, the data is always exactly that length, and you save a few bytes per row by not storing the length header.
(2) alignment-sensitive bulk-load data where downstream consumers expect fixed-width records. Otherwise, prefer VARCHAR, modern engines handle variable-length storage efficiently, and the space savings of CHAR are negligible for typical data.

-- pause --
Drill 10, DATE versus DATETIME versus DATETIME2 versus DATETIMEOFFSET.

Q: Walk me through sequel Server's date or time types.-- think --

A: DATE: date only, 3 bytes. TIME: time only, 3-5 bytes (precision-dependent). DATETIME: legacy date+time, 8 bytes, 3.33 milliseconds precision, range 1753-9999, no timezone.
DATETIME2: modern replacement, 6-8 bytes, 100 nanoseconds precision, range 0001-9999, no timezone, always prefer over DATETIME.
DATETIMEOFFSET: DATETIME2 plus a plus or minus HH:MM timezone offset, 8-10 bytes. SMALLDATETIME: 4 bytes, minute precision, rarely used.

Cross-Q: Why prefer DATETIME2 over DATETIME ?-- think --

A: (1) Wider range (back to year 0001), (2) higher precision (100 nanoseconds versus 3.33 milliseconds, DATETIME rounds to.000,.003, or.007 second fractions, causing subtle bugs in timestamp comparisons), (3) smaller storage at lower precisions ( DATETIME2(0) is 6 bytes versus DATETIME 's 8),
(4) ANSI-compliant.
DATETIME is legacy; DATETIME2 is the post-2008 standard. E F Core defaults to DATETIME2 for new mappings.

Cross-Q²: When do you need DATETIMEOFFSET versus DATETIME2 with UTC convention?-- think --

A: DATETIMEOFFSET when you need to preserve the original local time plus the offset, for example, recording when a user submitted a form in their local timezone, where both "2:00 PM their time" and "the UTC equivalent" matter.
DATETIME2 with UTC convention (always store UTC, convert at the edge) when you only care about the absolute instant and the user's local time is computed on display. Most apps choose the latter, simpler, no timezone confusion.
DATETIMEOFFSET shines for audit logs across regions, scheduling apps, and anywhere "what time was it locally" is part of the data.

-- pause --
Drill 11, Character encoding and UTF-8 in sequel Server.

Q: Is VARCHAR in sequel Server Unicode-safe?-- think --

A: Depends on the version and column collation. Pre-2019: VARCHAR was code-page-based (single byte, locale-specific), only NVARCHAR was Unicode (UTF-16).
sequel Server 2019+ added UTF-8 collations (for example, Latin1_General_100_CI_AS_SC_UTF8 ), when applied to VARCHAR, it stores UTF-8, supporting full Unicode at smaller storage cost than UTF-16 for mostly-ASCII text.

Cross-Q: Why would I pick UTF-8 VARCHAR over NVARCHAR (UTF-16)?-- think --

A: Storage savings for ASCII-heavy text. UTF-8 uses 1 byte for ASCII characters and 2-4 for non-ASCII; UTF-16 uses 2 bytes for everything in the BMP and 4 for supplementary. For mostly-English content, UTF-8 VARCHAR can be half the storage of NVARCHAR.
Trade-off: comparisons and length calculations are slightly more complex (variable-byte encoding), and joins with NVARCHAR columns require collation conversion that disables index seeks.

Cross-Q²: I migrated from NVARCHAR to UTF-8 VARCHAR and a join is now slow. Why?-- think --

A: Implicit collation conversion disables index seeks. If you join t1.utf8_varchar = t2.nvarchar_col, the engine must convert one side to the other's collation, which makes the predicate non-sargable, full scan.
Fix: either migrate both columns to matching collation, or explicitly convert with CAST on the small side. The same trap exists for any cross-collation comparison, not just UTF-8 or UTF-16.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Identity versus sequence versus GUID for PKs.

Q: I need to generate unique IDs for a new table. Identity, sequence, or GUID?-- think --

A: Identity (sequel Server IDENTITY(1,1), Postgres Q L GENERATED AS IDENTITY ): auto-increment per insert, simple, fast, sequential, index-friendly. Sequence ( CREATE SEQUENCE ): independent of any table, can be shared, can pre-allocate ranges for batch inserts.
GUID or UUID ( UNIQUEIDENTIFIER / UUID ): 128-bit, generated client-side or server-side, globally unique without coordination, but non-sequential by default (causes index fragmentation).

Cross-Q: When does GUID beat identity?-- think --

A: (1) Distributed systems where multiple writers can't coordinate to assign IDs, every node can generate locally without conflict. (2) Client-generated IDs for offline-first apps that sync later.
(3) Security: identity IDs leak count info ( /orders or 12345 tells you there are ~12k orders); GUIDs don't enumerate. (4) Merge scenarios where data from multiple sources combines without collision.
Trade-off: 16 bytes versus 4-8, slower joins, fragmented indexes unless using sequential GUIDs ( NEWSEQUENTIALID in sequel Server, UUIDv7 in modern stacks).

Cross-Q²: What's NEWSEQUENTIALID / UUIDv7 and why does it matter?-- think --

A: Standard random GUIDs (UUIDv4) cause index fragmentation because new rows insert at random positions in the clustered index, pages split, B-tree rebalances, write amplification spikes.
NEWSEQUENTIALID (sequel Server) and UUIDv7 (RFC 9562, 2024) produce GUIDs that are time-ordered in the first bits, so new rows append to the end of the clustered index like identity does. You get GUID benefits (uniqueness across nodes, no enumeration) without the index pain.
UUIDv7 is becoming the new default for distributed systems.

-- pause --
Drill 13, Integer overflow and BIGINT thresholds.

Q: At what row count should I switch from INT to BIGINT for a PK?-- think --

A: Practical threshold: proactively migrate before crossing 1 billion rows to give yourself headroom. INT max is 2,147,483,647 (~2.1B). Migrating a heavily-trafficked column while live is expensive, every row's PK changes, foreign keys cascade, indexes rebuild, downstream caches invalidate.
Do it when you have time, not when you're at 1.9B and panicking.

Cross-Q: What's the classic public example of int overflow in production?-- think --

A: Twitter, June 2009, the "Twitpocalypse": status IDs crossed the signed 32-bit maximum (2,147,483,647). Twitter itself was fine; what broke were the third-party clients that had stored those IDs in signed 32-bit integers, where the next ID appeared as a negative number.
Twitter forced the rollover at a chosen hour (12 June 2009) rather than let it happen overnight, so that engineers on all sides were awake for it.
A second round followed in September 2009 as IDs approached the unsigned 32-bit limit and clients that had "fixed" it by switching to unsigned hit the same wall again.
(Twitter's Snowflake scheme, 64-bit, time-ordered IDs, came later, in 2010, and was about generating IDs across many machines without a central auto-increment; it is a different problem that happens to be solved by a wider type.) The transferable lesson:
the overflow breaks whoever holds the narrowest copy of the value, which includes clients, caches and export files you don't control.
For any table that might reach billions of rows (events, messages, audit logs, IoT readings), start at BIGINT.

Cross-Q²: What about counter columns that go negative when they overflow?-- think --

A: In sequel Server, integer overflow on increment throws an arithmetic overflow error and aborts the statement, the increment fails, the row stays at MAX.
In MySQL, it depends on sql_mode: STRICT_TRANS_TABLES raises an error; without it, the column is clamped to MAX (silent saturation) or wraps (engine-dependent). Postgres Q L throws. The safe defaults are strict modes everywhere.
For counters that might exceed INT, switch to BIGINT proactively; for application-level counters, use atomic increment with overflow checks.

-- pause --
Drill 14, DEFAULT value gotchas.

Q: I added a created_at column with DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP. Does it backfill existing rows?-- think --

A: Depends on the engine, and on whether the new column is nullable.
sequel Server draws the line at WITH VALUES: "If the new column allows null values and you add a default definition with the new column,
you can use WITH VALUES to store the default value in the new column for each existing row in the table." Omit WITH VALUES and the existing rows keep the NULL they would have had anyway, the same page's baseline case is that "if the new column allows null values and you don't specify a default,
the new column contains a null value for each row in the table".
For a NOT NULL column there is no choice: "If the new column doesn't allow null values and the table isn't empty, you must add a DEFAULT definition with the new column. The new column automatically loads with the default value in the new columns in each existing row."

Postgres Q L does backfill, nullable or not: "When a column is added with ADD COLUMN and a non-volatile DEFAULT is specified, the default value is evaluated at the time of the statement and the result stored in the table's metadata,
where it will be returned when any existing rows are accessed." Existing rows show the default, one value, evaluated once, with no table rewrite.
A volatile default ( clock_timestamp(), random() ) is the expensive case: it "will cause the entire table and its indexes to be rewritten". MySQL likewise applies the default to existing rows.

The rule to carry: only sequel Server leaves existing rows NULL, and only when the column is nullable and you omitted WITH VALUES. "The default applies to new rows only" is not the general behaviour.

Cross-Q: How do you safely add a NOT NULL column with a default?-- think --

A: Phased. (1) Add as nullable with no default: ALTER TABLE t ADD created_at DATETIME2 NULL. (2) Backfill: UPDATE t SET created_at = GETUTCDATE() WHERE created_at IS NULL, in batches if the table is large to avoid blocking.
(3) Tighten to NOT NULL with default for future inserts: ALTER TABLE t ALTER COLUMN created_at DATETIME2 NOT NULL + add the default constraint. This pattern works across engines and is online-friendly.
Worth saying out loud that it isn't always necessary: on Postgres Q L a non-volatile default stores one evaluated value in the table's metadata with no rewrite, so ADD COLUMN.
NOT NULL DEFAULT now() is already a cheap operation there, the phased version earns its keep when the default is volatile, or when you're on an engine or version that rewrites the table.

Cross-Q²: What's the gotcha with DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP and replication?-- think --

A: Replicated databases that re-execute statements (statement-based replication, like older MySQL) can produce different timestamps on each replica because CURRENT_TIMESTAMP evaluates at execution time on each node. Row-based replication ships the actual values, avoiding this.
For correctness, prefer (1) computing timestamps in the application layer once and inserting the literal value, or (2) row-based replication mode, or (3) DEFAULT (CURRENT_TIMESTAMP AT TIME ZONE 'UTC') to at least pin the timezone.
The "same default everywhere" assumption breaks in statement-replicated clusters.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Putting it together: schema design for a new entity.

Q: Design the columns for a new audit_logs table. Walk me through your type choices.-- think --

A: id BIGINT IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY (high-volume table, INT would overflow), actor_id INT NOT NULL (FK to users, INT plenty for user count), action NVARCHAR(50) NOT NULL (short codes, Unicode-safe), details NVARCHAR(MAX) (variable-length Jason or text),
created_at DATETIME2 NOT NULL DEFAULT SYSUTCDATETIME() (UTC, nanoseconds precision), created_at_offset DATETIMEOFFSET NULL (preserve original timezone if relevant), ip_address VARCHAR(45) NULL (max IPv6 length, ASCII-only so VARCHAR not NVARCHAR).

Cross-Q: Why not just one created_at DATETIMEOFFSET ?-- think --

A: Two reasons. (1) Most queries filter on UTC time ( WHERE created_at BETWEEN. AND. ), a separate DATETIME2 UTC column is leaner for indexing and comparisons. (2) DATETIMEOFFSET joins and indexes can be tricky if some rows have offsets and others don't.
The split lets the UTC column be the canonical sort or filter axis while the offset column is optional context. If you only ever query UTC, drop created_at_offset entirely.

Cross-Q²: How would you add an index for "show recent audit logs for a user"?-- think --

A: CREATE INDEX IX_audit_logs_actor_created ON audit_logs(actor_id, created_at DESC) INCLUDE (action, details). The composite key ( actor_id, created_at DESC ) supports WHERE actor_id = X ORDER BY created_at DESC LIMIT N as an index seek + range scan, no sort.
INCLUDE (action, details) makes it a covering index, the query is satisfied entirely from the index without touching the table. For a high-traffic audit table, this is the difference between sub-millisecond and hundreds of milliseconds.
Watch the index size; covering indexes on NVARCHAR(MAX) can balloon storage.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

Five sublanguages: DDL or DML or DQL or DCL or TCL; the names show up in interviews and reviews.
Logical execution: FROM -> WHERE -> GROUP BY -> HAVING -> SELECT -> DISTINCT -> ORDER BY -> LIMIT.
NULL semantics: three-valued logic; = NULL always returns 0 rows; use IS NULL.
DECIMAL for money: never FLOAT / REAL; binary rounding makes 0.1 + 0.2 != 0.3.
TIMESTAMPTZ / DATETIMEOFFSET: store UTC + offset; never naive TIMESTAMP for events.
Six constraints: PRIMARY KEY, FOREIGN KEY, UNIQUE, NOT NULL, CHECK, DEFAULT.
Cascades: CASCADE for owned children, SET NULL for severable, RESTRICT for protected.
LIKE with leading %: non-sargable; index unusable; use FTS or trigram ( pg_trgm ) instead.
OFFSET pagination: O(N+M); deteriorates as offset grows; cursor pagination is O(M).
NOT NULL by default: each nullable column doubles branching code; opt in to nullable explicitly.
CHECK rejects only FALSE: UNKNOWN passes, so a nullable column slips through its own range check. Pair CHECK with NOT NULL.
UNIQUE + NULL: one NULL in sequel Server; many in Postgres Q L or MySQL (Postgres Q L 15+ can say NULLS NOT DISTINCT ). Soft delete wants a filtered or partial unique index.
FK not equal to index: only MySQL or InnoDB indexes the referencing column for you; elsewhere the parent delete scans the child.
Implicit conversion: lower precedence converts. nvarchar outranks varchar in sequel Server, so an E F Core or Dapper string parameter against a varchar column converts the column and loses the seek.
TRUNCATE: rollback-able on sequel Server and Postgres Q L, implicit commit on MySQL; resets identity on sequel Server or MySQL, not on Postgres Q L unless RESTART IDENTITY; takes an exclusive table lock everywhere.
NULL sort order: first in sequel Server and MySQL ascending, last in Postgres Q L; NULLS FIRST or LAST syntax is available in Postgres Q L and Oracle but not in sequel Server or MySQL.
Batch the big DML: loop around set-based batches; sequel Server escalates to a table lock at 5,000 locks on one table (Microsoft Learn).
Integer division truncates on sequel Server and Postgres Q L ( 5 or 2 to 2 ); MySQL's / is fractional and DIV is the integer form. sequel Server's AVG(int_col) returns int. Widen before dividing, not after.
DML returns rows: OUTPUT with INSERTED / DELETED (sequel Server), RETURNING (Postgres Q L), LAST_INSERT_ID() (MySQL, first id of a multi-row insert, per connection).
Rows affected = compare-and-swap: WHERE id = @id AND version = @v; 0 rows means someone else won. E F Core turns that into DbUpdateConcurrencyException.
Upsert: ON CONFLICT (Postgres Q L, needs an inferable unique index), ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE (MySQL, fires on any unique key), MERGE WITH (HOLDLOCK) (sequel Server, without the hint it can raise duplicate-key errors).
No predicate ordering: AND doesn't short-circuit; use CASE or TRY_CAST, or rewrite so no guard is needed.
Untrusted constraints: WITH NOCHECK (sequel Server, is_not_trusted ) and NOT VALID (Postgres Q L, convalidated ) govern new rows only; sequel Server's optimizer ignores them until validated.
IS DISTINCT FROM: NULL-safe equality, Postgres Q L always, sequel Server 2022+, MySQL spells it.
ORDER BY in a view or subquery doesn't survive into the outer query, even with TOP 100 PERCENT.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, An UPDATE without WHERE in production.

Problem: A junior runs UPDATE orders SET status = 'Cancelled'; against the production replica via psql instead of staging. Two million orders flip status; customer support phones are ringing within minutes.

Diagnosis: The on-call senior immediately checks if a transaction is open: SELECT pid, state, xact_start, query FROM pg_stat_activity WHERE state LIKE '%transaction%';. The session shows idle in transaction, there's no open transaction wrapping the bad UPDATE, so it's already committed.
They check pg_stat_database for the database's tup_updated to confirm the scale, then look at backup recency: SELECT backup_label, time FROM pg_stat_archiver. Last full base backup was 6 hours ago; write-ahead log archiving is current, so PITR is feasible.

Fix: Restore the affected rows from PITR to a sandbox cluster, then re-apply the correct status:

Then enforce a guard: idle_in_transaction_session_timeout and a psql profile that aliases destructive commands inside BEGIN.

Why it works: PITR replays the write-ahead log up to a point in time, so an authoritative pre-disaster snapshot exists. Joining back via id lets you fix only the affected rows without restoring the whole DB.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Logical execution order: WHERE evaluates at step 2, before SELECT computes at step 5. The alias literally doesn't exist yet. To filter on a computed value, repeat the expression in WHERE, use a C T E or subquery, or filter in HAVING after grouping.

DB-level cascades are atomic and bypass-proof: any path that deletes a parent (manual sequel, batch jobs, ETL) cleans children. App cascades add flexibility (logging, soft-delete, conditional behaviour) but break when bypassed.
Mature systems use DB cascades for correctness invariants and app logic for soft-delete or audit needs.

COUNT() counts every row (NULL-included); COUNT(col) counts non-NULL values of col. The difference is the count of NULLs in that column. Use COUNT() for "how many rows" and COUNT(col) for "how many have a value here".

The cast wraps created_at in a function call; B-tree indexes on the raw column become unusable, forcing a sequential scan. Range predicates over the raw column allow index-range seek. Same lesson applies to LOWER(name), EXTRACT(year FROM.), et cetera
- either rewrite the predicate or build an expression index.

NULL preserves the "unknown" semantic but forces every consumer to handle three-valued logic and COALESCE everywhere.
Sentinels (for example, empty string, 0, sentinel date) simplify queries but conflate "unknown" with a real value, eventually breaking queries when the sentinel is itself a valid input.
The right answer depends on whether the distinction matters; most teams pick NOT NULL with a sentinel only when nothing else makes sense.

Data type precedence decides which side of the comparison converts, and the lower-precedence side is the one that moves. int outranks varchar, so the string literal is converted once, before the seek, the column is untouched and the index still works.
nvarchar outranks varchar, so in the second case the column is converted, on every row, which wraps the indexed key in CONVERT_IMPLICIT and forces a scan. Fix it at the source: IsUnicode(false) (E F Core) or DbString { IsAnsi = true } (Dapper) so the parameter matches the column.

The column is nullable and a NULL arrived. A CHECK constraint rejects a row only when the predicate evaluates to FALSE; with a NULL operand the predicate is UNKNOWN, which is not FALSE, so the row is accepted. This is the mirror image of WHERE, which keeps a row only when the predicate is TRUE.
If the intent is "always a valid percentage", you need NOT NULL alongside the CHECK.

sequel Server and Postgres Q L: yes, inside a transaction. MySQL: no, TRUNCATE is DDL there and causes an implicit commit, which also ends any transaction you had open. Identity: reset on sequel Server and MySQL, untouched on Postgres Q L unless you write RESTART IDENTITY.
Foreign keys: all three refuse to truncate a table other tables reference (Postgres Q L will do it with CASCADE or if every referencing table is truncated in the same statement). Triggers: none of them fire row-level delete triggers; Postgres Q L alone offers ON TRUNCATE triggers.
And in every engine TRUNCATE takes an exclusive table lock, it is short, not gentle.

Some rows have a NULL country. DISTINCT treats NULLs as equal to each other and returns one NULL row among the 12. COUNT(DISTINCT country) is an aggregate, and aggregates ignore NULL inputs entirely, so it counts only the 11 real values. The same split explains COUNT(*) versus COUNT(col).

name is nullable and the engines disagree about where NULLs belong. sequel Server treats NULL as the lowest possible value, so the first page is full of NULLs; Postgres Q L sorts NULLs as if larger than any value, so they land at the end (MySQL matches sequel Server).
Postgres Q L and Oracle let you say which you want with NULLS FIRST / NULLS LAST; sequel Server and MySQL have no such syntax, so you emulate it with a leading sort expression such as ORDER BY CASE WHEN name IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END, name.

Integer division. On sequel Server "if an integer dividend is divided by an integer divisor, the result is an integer that has any fractional part of the result truncated"; Postgres Q L's operator table says the same ("division truncates the result towards zero", 5 / 2 to 2 ).
Any true ratio 1 becomes 0.
MySQL is the exception, / produces a fractional result there, and DIV is the separate integer-division operator. The fix is to widen an operand before dividing ( converted * 1.0 / visits ), because casting the result is too late.
The same trap hits sequel Server's AVG over an int column, which the return-type table maps back to int.

The lost update. Nothing in the second UPDATE referenced the state the user actually read, so it overwrote it. Add the read value to the predicate, UPDATE orders SET.
WHERE id = @id AND version = @expected_version, and treat the rows-affected count as the result: 1 means you won, 0 means the row changed under you. That's optimistic concurrency: it detects the conflict rather than preventing it.
E F Core implements exactly this with a concurrency token, and its docs describe the outcome, "the UPDATE fails to find any matching rows and reports that zero were affected. As a result, E F Core's SaveChanges() throws a DbUpdateConcurrencyException ".
On sequel Server, a rowversion column mapped with [Timestamp] supplies the token automatically. Note the count only carries this meaning when the WHERE targets one row by key; after a bulk update, 0 rows just means nothing matched.

Between the SELECT and the INSERT another connection can insert the same key; the application has no way to hold anything across that gap. The unique index is the only component that can settle two simultaneous inserts, and it settles it by rejecting one. Atomic forms: Postgres Q L INSERT.
ON CONFLICT (col) DO UPDATE, which "guarantees an atomic INSERT or UPDATE outcome. even under high concurrency" and needs a conflict target inferable from a unique index; MySQL INSERT.
ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE, which triggers on any unique key collision on the table, not just the intended one;
sequel Server MERGE, which per Microsoft's own docs needs HOLDLOCK, "specifying the HOLDLOCK will prevent against unique key violations", because MERGE alone is not safe when it both inserts and updates the same keys.

sequel has no guaranteed predicate evaluation order and AND does not short-circuit left to right. The type filter was never protecting the cast; it just happened to be applied first in the plan the optimizer had been choosing.
Postgres Q L states the rule plainly, evaluation order "is not defined", and boolean expressions in WHERE "can be reorganized in any manner allowed by the laws of Boolean algebra", and sequel Server's own guidance is that "the order of evaluation for predicates is never guaranteed".
The new index changed the plan, the cast moved ahead of the filter, and rows that were never meant to reach it did.
CASE is the one construct with a defined order; TRY_CAST / TRY_CONVERT (sequel Server 2012+) returns NULL instead of raising; the durable fix is a typed column, because the query depends on a correlation between two columns that the optimizer cannot know about.

It was added without validating the existing rows, WITH NOCHECK on sequel Server, NOT VALID on Postgres Q L, so it only ever governed rows written after it appeared.
sequel Server records this as is_not_trusted = 1 in sys.check_constraints and sys.foreign_keys ("has not been verified by the system"), and additionally stops reasoning from it:
"The query optimizer doesn't consider constraints that are defined WITH NOCHECK." Postgres Q L records pg_constraint.convalidated = false.
Both offer the completion step, ALTER TABLE t WITH CHECK CHECK CONSTRAINT ALL and VALIDATE CONSTRAINT respectively, and both will fail loudly if the historical rows really are bad, which is the point of running it.