-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

The first eight files cover sequel building blocks. This one applies them to the canonical interview problems and recurring real-world patterns.
By the time you finish this session, "find the second-highest salary," "find consecutive login days per user," "find pairs of products often bought together" should be muscle memory.

LeetCode's sequel section is full of these patterns. So is every senior backend interview's sequel whiteboard round. The good news: most problems reduce to a handful of templates, and once you recognize the template, the solution writes itself.

When NOT to memorize: don't grind purely for interview prep if you're already fluent. Use this session to spot patterns you haven't seen and get them in your toolbox.

The part that separates a senior answer from a correct one is the second half: after you write the query, you have to say what the engine will do with it, and where the pattern stops working.
Most of these templates have a version that is right on one engine and a syntax error on another, and most of them have a plan shape that is fine at ten thousand rows and fatal at ten million. Both halves are interview material.

In the real world: a team standardised on a "recipes" wiki page of exactly these patterns, copied from a Postgres Q L codebase, and used it when they built a reporting module for an on-premises customer running sequel Server.
Six of the eight recipes did not compile: WITH RECURSIVE (T sequel has no RECURSIVE keyword), login_date - 1 on a date column (sequel Server allows no integer arithmetic on date ), LEAST / GREATEST (sequel Server 2022 and later only), PERCENTILE_CONT with GROUP BY (T sequel requires OVER ),
LIMIT (T sequel uses TOP or OFFSET or FETCH ), and a RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL frame (T sequel's RANGE accepts only UNBOUNDED and CURRENT ROW ).
None of them was a hard problem; all of them were found one at a time, in the customer's environment, over a fortnight. The lesson the team wrote at the top of the page afterwards was that a pattern is not portable until you have named the engine it was written for.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Find Nth highest value.

The classic. Five solutions; pick the one that fits the dialect and ties policy.

Method 1, subquery: find max smaller than the previous max.

Method 2, LIMIT. OFFSET:

Method 3, DENSE_RANK window:

Method 4, ROW_NUMBER (no ties):

Method 5, OFFSET FETCH (ANSI):

The interview gotcha: ask "ties or distinct?" before solving. "2nd highest distinct salary" to DENSE_RANK = 2 or DISTINCT + LIMIT or OFFSET. "Person who has the 2nd highest salary" (Olympic-style) to RANK = 2.

WITH TIES, the clause most people don't know exists. Both sequel Server and Postgres Q L can extend a row limit to include everything tied with the last row, without a window function:

Both return four rows if the third and fourth salaries are equal. The default is ONLY (exactly n rows, tie broken arbitrarily).
Postgres Q L added WITH TIES in 13, the release note reads "Allow FETCH FIRST to use WITH TIES to return any additional rows that match the last result row", and its docs note ORDER BY is mandatory with it and SKIP LOCKED is not allowed alongside it.
MySQL has no equivalent; there you write RANK() <= 3, RANK, not DENSE_RANK, because WITH TIES takes the first n rows and then adds whatever ties the nth, which is exactly the set RANK numbers.
( DENSE_RANK() <= 3 answers a different question, "the top three distinct values", and returns more rows whenever there are ties the cut.)

In the real world: a quarterly sales-incentive report picked the top three reps per region with ROW_NUMBER(). <= 3 and fed the result straight into the payroll export.
Two reps in one region closed the quarter on identical revenue to the cent, an artifact of a single large account being split evenly between them, and ROW_NUMBER broke the tie the way it always does, by whatever order the sort happened to emit.
One rep was paid the bonus, the other was not, and the difference was invisible in the report because the losing row simply did not appear. It surfaced as an HR complaint, not a bug report.
The fix was one clause, TOP (3) WITH TIES, plus a decision from the compensation owner that ties are paid to both, which is the part engineering could not decide alone.
The general lesson: ROW_NUMBER does not report that it made a choice, so anywhere its output drives money or access, ask what the tie policy is before you write the query.

-- pause --
Top-N per group.

A near-universal real-world pattern. The window-function solution is the cleanest.

For ties:
ROW_NUMBER(), exactly N per group, ties broken arbitrarily.
RANK(), ties get the same rank; gap to next; possibly more than N rows.
DENSE_RANK(), ties same rank; no gap; up to N distinct ranks.

Lateral / CROSS APPLY alternative (works without window functions):

LATERAL or CROSS APPLY runs the inner subquery for each outer row. Useful when you need pagination semantics or when the inner query references the outer.

Two things about APPLY that catch people.

First, CROSS APPLY is an inner join in disguise: a category with no products vanishes from the result entirely. If the report must list every category, including empty ones, use OUTER APPLY (sequel Server) or LEFT JOIN LATERAL. ON true (Postgres Q L), which emit the outer row with NULLs.
The window-function version has the same shape difference in reverse, it can only return categories that have at least one product row, because it starts from products.

Second, APPLY only wins if the inner query can seek. ORDER BY sales DESC LIMIT 3 against a heap or an index that does not lead with category_id still reads every product for the category and sorts it, once per category, which is strictly worse than sorting once.
The index that makes APPLY pay is one whose key is (category_id, sales DESC) with the projected columns included:

With that index, each inner call is "seek to the start of the category, read three entries, stop". See Reading the plan: window function versus APPLY for what the two plans look like side by side.

MySQL has no LATERAL before 8.0.14 and no APPLY at all; on older MySQL the window-function form (8.0+) or a correlated subquery is the only option.

In the real world: a "top 10 customers per region" list drove an automated thank-you campaign with a gift card attached.
It used RANK() rather than ROW_NUMBER(), because someone had read that RANK "handles ties properly", and the consuming code did foreach (var row in results) with no per-region cap.
In three regions the tenth and eleventh customers had identical lifetime spend, round numbers from a single annual contract, so RANK returned eleven rows for those regions and eleven gift cards went out where the budget said ten. Finance noticed at reconciliation.
Nothing was wrong with RANK; what was wrong was that the caller assumed a row count the query never promised. The team's fix was to keep RANK (the business genuinely wanted ties honoured) and move the cap into the budget check instead of assuming it.
The reusable point for an interview: ROW_NUMBER guarantees exactly N rows per group, RANK and DENSE_RANK guarantee at most N ranks and any number of rows, so if downstream code depends on the count, only one of the three is safe.

-- pause --
Running totals and moving averages.

Window functions excel at time-series transformations.

One pass over the data; five derived metrics. The pre-window-function era required either correlated subqueries (slow) or app-level computation. Window functions made all this elegant.

ROWS 6 PRECEDING means six rows, not six days. That distinction is the single most common defect in this pattern. If daily_revenue has a row for every calendar day, the two coincide and the query is right.
If a day with no sales produces no row, which is what happens when the table is built by GROUP BY over a transactions table, then the frame silently reaches further back in time to collect its six rows, and a "7-day moving average" quietly becomes "the last 7 days that had any data".

Two fixes, and they are not equally portable:

LAG / LEAD have the same trap: LAG(revenue) OVER (ORDER BY day) is "the previous row", which is only "yesterday" if yesterday exists. This is why calendar dimension tables keep turning up in reporting schemas, they turn a row-offset problem back into a date problem.

In the real world: an alerting job compared each day's error count against its own 7-day moving average, written with ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW over a table produced by grouping the raw event log.
During a three-week partial outage the ingestion pipeline stopped writing rows on the days it failed, so the "7-day average" was computed from seven scattered days spanning most of a month, most of them pre-outage.
The current day was compared against a baseline drawn largely from healthy traffic and, worse, the days with no data raised no alert at all because they produced no row to evaluate. The dashboard was green throughout.
The postmortem action was a dim_date join so that every day materialises with a zero, which made the missing days visible as zeros, and a zero is exactly the value that should have paged someone.

-- pause --
Gaps and islands.

A classic pattern: identify consecutive sequences in a stream of timestamped data. "How many consecutive days did each user log in?" "Find consecutive runs of OK status before the next error."

The trick: subtract a row number from the date, consecutive items have the same difference; gaps create new groups.

Solution (Postgres Q L syntax, see the engine note below):

The math: for consecutive dates, date - row_number*1day is constant; for a gap, the row number "skips ahead" of the date, breaking the sequence into a new group.

For integers (instead of dates), subtract ROW_NUMBER from the value directly. The pattern generalizes.

The date arithmetic is not portable. Only the island_grp expression changes:

Postgres Q L, maps to, login_date - INTERVAL '1 day' * (rn - 1), or the shorter login_date - (rn - 1):int, Postgres Q L has a date - integer to date operator but no date - bigint one, and ROW_NUMBER() returns bigint, so the cast is what makes the short form compile.
sequel Server, maps to, DATEADD(day, -(rn - 1), login_date), T sequel raises "Operand type clash: date is incompatible with int" for date - 1; only datetime / smalldatetime support integer arithmetic.
MySQL, maps to, DATE_SUB(login_date, INTERVAL (rn - 1) DAY).

You cannot reference the ROW_NUMBER() alias from another expression in the same SELECT list on any of the three, a select-list alias simply isn't in scope for its sibling expressions, so the row number and the subtraction go in one expression, or the row number goes in its own C T E first.
The second form is easier to read and costs nothing. ( WHERE and GROUP BY can't reference it either, and there the reason is a stronger one: window functions are evaluated after those clauses run, which is why filtering on a window result always needs a wrapping C T E or subquery.)

Duplicates break the trick, silently. The whole method rests on "row number advances by exactly one when the date advances by exactly one".
If a user can log in twice on the same day, two rows share a date but get consecutive row numbers, so the second one's date - rn lands a day earlier than the first, a value that looks like a new island, and the streak is cut in half. The pattern needs one row per user per day.
Either de-duplicate first ( SELECT DISTINCT user_id, login_date ) or swap ROW_NUMBER() for DENSE_RANK(), which assigns the same number to same-date rows and leaves the arithmetic intact:

Same reasoning applies to the integer version: ROW_NUMBER on a column with duplicate values does not produce constant differences.

Variations:
"Find longest streak per user": add ORDER BY days DESC LIMIT 1 per user (use ranking).
"Find current streak": filter island_grp to the latest one.

In the real world: a fitness app shipped a "consecutive days logged" streak badge built on the classic date - ROW_NUMBER island query. It was correct in every test, because the fixtures had one activity row per user per day.
In production users sync from two devices, a phone and a watch, and a day with two syncs wrote two rows. Those users' streaks were computed as a chain of one- and two-day islands and the badge reset constantly; the more engaged the user, the more devices, the more broken their streak.
Support tickets said "the app forgot my streak" and were closed as unreproducible for weeks, because reproducing it required a second device. The one-word fix was DENSE_RANK in place of ROW_NUMBER.
The durable lesson is that this pattern has an unstated precondition, one row per entity per interval, and a seed script that never violates it will never find the bug.

-- pause --
Median calculation.

Trickier than mean, many dialects have no built-in median.

Method 1, PERCENTILE_CONT (Postgres Q L, sequel Server 2012+):

_CONT interpolates; _DISC returns a real value. Microsoft's documentation states the difference plainly: PERCENTILE_CONT "interpolates the appropriate value, which might or might not exist in the data set, while PERCENTILE_DISC always returns an actual value from the set".
For an even number of rows with salaries 100 and 200 in the middle, _CONT gives 150, a salary nobody earns, and _DISC gives 100.
For statistics that is fine; for anything a human will treat as a real record (a median contract value quoted to a customer, a median price shown in a U I, a representative row to link to) _DISC is the honest choice.

MySQL has neither function, MySQL bug #93234, "Support percentile_cont (sequel Standard) for median", is still unfixed (status: Verified), so Method 2 is not merely the portable option there, it is the only option.

Method 2, ROW_NUMBER + COUNT (universal):

Median per group, and here the engines diverge sharply:

In sequel Server that query does not compile. T sequel's PERCENTILE_CONT is an analytic function, not an aggregate: its documented syntax is PERCENTILE_CONT ( numeric_literal ) WITHIN GROUP ( ORDER BY. ) OVER ( [ ] ), the OVER clause is mandatory and GROUP BY is not an option.
Because it is a window function it does not collapse rows, so it returns one row per employee, each carrying its department's median. Microsoft's own example wraps it in SELECT DISTINCT:

SELECT DISTINCT gets the right answer but computes and then discards a row per employee. On a large table, compute the medians in a C T E and join, so the plan aggregates instead of expanding.

In the real world: a B2B pricing tool showed sales reps the "median deal size for this customer segment" as a starting anchor for a quote. It used PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5), and for segments with an even number of historical deals it returned the midpoint between the two middle contracts.
A rep quoted that figure to a prospect who asked which existing customer it referred to; there wasn't one, and the number sat between two real contracts that were nowhere near each other. The number was not wrong as a statistic, it was wrong as a claim, and the tool presented it as a claim.
Switching to PERCENTILE_DISC made every displayed figure a real historical deal that a rep could point at, which is what the screen had implicitly promised all along. Choosing between the two is a product decision disguised as a function name.

-- pause --
Pivot and unpivot.

Pivot turns rows into columns. Unpivot does the reverse.

Pivot, conditional aggregation (portable):

sequel Server PIVOT operator (less portable):

The derived table src is not stylistic, it is load-bearing, and this is the classic PIVOT bug. PIVOT groups by every column of its input that is not the aggregated column or the spreading column, and that grouping list is implicit: it appears nowhere in the syntax.
Write FROM sales_table PIVOT (.) directly and any extra column on the table, order_id, created_at, region, silently joins the grouping key, so you get one output row per distinct combination instead of one per month, and the totals fragment.
The symptom is "my pivot returns too many rows", the cause is a column you forgot the table had, and the fix is always the same: project exactly the three columns you want in a derived table first. Conditional aggregation has no equivalent trap because its GROUP BY is written out.

Postgres Q L has no PIVOT operator at all (the tablefunc extension's crosstab() function is the nearest equivalent and requires you to declare the output column list anyway); MySQL has none either. Conditional aggregation is the only form that runs everywhere.

Unpivot, UNION ALL or vendor operator:

For dynamic pivots (column count not known at compile time): generate dynamic sequel or do final pivot in the app layer (often cleaner).

In the real world: an internal analytics endpoint pivoted "amount by custom attribute" where the attribute names were tenant-supplied strings.
The dynamic pivot was built by string concatenation, SET @cols = @cols + ',[' + a.name + ']', and shipped without review because it was "an internal admin tool".
A tenant created an attribute whose name contained a closing bracket, which broke out of the identifier and turned the rest of the name into executable T sequel inside the EXEC.
Nothing malicious happened; the attribute was a typo and the query just failed with a syntax error, which is how it was found. It was a sequel injection hole reachable by any customer through a normal product feature.
The correct primitive was already available, QUOTENAME() escapes embedded brackets by doubling them, which is exactly what hand-written concatenation forgets, and the better answer was the one they took instead:
return the long form (month, type, amount) and pivot in C sharp, where the attribute name is data and can never be code.

-- pause --
Hierarchical queries.

Recursive CTEs (covered in Subqueries and CTEs) handle hierarchies.

Before the examples, the four things that differ between engines, all four are routine follow-up questions, and the examples use Postgres Q L syntax:

Keyword, WITH RECURSIVE required, no RECURSIVE keyword exists, plain WITH; writing WITH RECURSIVE is a syntax error, WITH RECURSIVE required.
Runaway guard, none built in, MAXRECURSION, server-wide default 100, cte_max_recursion_depth, default 1000.
Set operator, UNION ALL or UNION, " UNION ALL is the only set operator allowed between the last anchor member and first recursive member", UNION ALL or UNION.
Cycle handling, CYCLE clause (Postgres Q L 14+), manual, carry a path column and test it, manual.

The runaway-guard row is the important one. sequel Server stops a runaway recursion by itself: exceed the limit and you get Msg 530, The statement terminated. The maximum recursion 100 has been exhausted before statement completion.
The hint accepts 0 to 32767, where OPTION (MAXRECURSION 0) means no limit, and note that a legitimate deep hierarchy trips the default of 100 just as readily as a cycle does, so seeing Msg 530 does not by itself mean your data is broken.

Postgres Q L has no such limit. A cycle in the data runs until the query fills temp_file_limit, disk, or memory, and on a busy box that can be a bigger event than a failed query. Two defences:

UNION instead of UNION ALL also helps in Postgres Q L, it discards rows duplicating any previous result, but the docs warn it is not a general cycle guard:
"often a cycle does not involve output rows that are completely duplicate", so two paths reaching the same node with different accumulated data still loop.
The CYCLE clause tracks the key columns you name, which is the check that actually terminates.

Common interview prompts:

1. "List all descendants of node X":

2. "Find the path from root to a node":

3. "Bill of materials" (parts and sub-parts):

A bill of materials is the case where cycle protection stops being theoretical: a component that transitively contains itself is a data-entry error the schema cannot prevent with a foreign key, and the recursive query is usually the first thing to notice.

In the real world: a product-catalogue import let a supplier feed re-parent categories, and one night a feed set a top-level category's parent_id to one of its own grandchildren.
On the sequel Server instance the effect was a failed nightly report, Msg 530, maximum recursion exhausted, an alert at 02:00, and an engineer who found the cycle in twenty minutes because the error named the mechanism.
The same schema and the same feed ran on a Postgres Q L instance for a second product, and there the recursive C T E had no ceiling: it ran for hours accumulating rows, filled the temp space on the volume, and the first symptom anyone saw was unrelated queries failing to allocate.
The report was not even the thing that paged. Same bug, same data, two very different nights, and the difference was a default.
The team added WHERE depth < 50 to every recursive C T E in the codebase and a CHECK -style validation step in the import, because a guard on the query only limits the damage; only the import can stop the cycle existing.

-- pause --
Self-joins for pair finding.

"Find pairs of X that share Y" pattern.

Two notes on those queries.

First, LEAST / GREATEST are doing nothing in either one. The join predicate already says o1.customer_id < o2.customer_id, so the pair arrives canonical and the functions are a no-op.
Pick one mechanism: the inequality in the join (which also halves the work by eliminating half the candidate pairs before they are formed) or LEAST / GREATEST in the projection (needed when the inequality can't go in the join, for example when you are canonicalising rows that came from a UNION ).
Using both reads as though the author was unsure which one worked.

Second, LEAST / GREATEST are the least portable functions on this page:

sequel Server: added in 2022 (16.x) and Azure sequel. Nothing before that, on sequel Server 2019 and earlier you write CASE WHEN a < b THEN a ELSE b END or a VALUES -based CROSS APPLY (SELECT MIN(v) AS m FROM (VALUES (a),(b)) AS t(v)) AS x.
NULL semantics differ by engine, in opposite directions. sequel Server: "If one or more arguments aren't NULL, then NULL arguments are ignored during comparison. If all arguments are NULL, then GREATEST returns NULL." Postgres Q L behaves the same way.
MySQL is the opposite: " GREATEST() returns NULL if any argument is NULL." Port a query that uses GREATEST(a, b) over a nullable column between MySQL and either of the other two and the rows that change are exactly the ones with a NULL, usually the incomplete records nobody is looking at.

The cost model to say out loud. A self-join on order_id produces a pair for every combination of lines within an order: with the < predicate that is n(n−1)/2 rows for an order with n lines. That is fine when orders have five lines.
A wholesale order with 800 lines contributes 319,600 pairs on its own, one row of input, six figures of intermediate result, and the aggregate has to hash all of them. Market-basket queries do not degrade gradually as the table grows; they degrade suddenly when one atypical order arrives.

In the real world: a "frequently bought together" recommendation job ran nightly over order_items with exactly the self-join and finished in a few minutes for two years. The company then onboarded a distributor whose "orders" were restocking manifests with hundreds of lines each.
The nightly job stopped finishing: the pair count from those accounts dominated everything, the hash aggregate spilled, and the job was still running when the morning batch window opened and started contending with it.
Nothing had changed in the code or the row count of the table, the shape of the data had changed.
The fix was a HAVING COUNT(*) >= 2 at the end (which does not help, because it runs after the pairs are formed) and then the real one: exclude orders a line-count threshold from basket analysis entirely, because a restocking manifest is not a shopping basket and its pairs are not a signal.
Worth remembering as an interview answer, the useful move was a domain decision about which rows belong in the query, not a tuning change.

-- pause --
Anti-patterns rephrased as classics.

Common interview problems hidden behind unfamiliar prompts:

"Find duplicates":

"Find rows missing in another table" (anti-join):

NOT EXISTS, not NOT IN. If the subquery can produce a single NULL, NOT IN returns zero rows, x <> NULL is UNKNOWN, so the predicate can never be true, and the query looks like it found nothing rather than like it broke.
Standard three-valued logic, identical on all three engines, and the most common way an anti-join silently returns an empty set.

**"Find customers who bought every product in this list"** is the other prompt in this family, relational division, where the naive IN answers "any of" instead of "all of". Worked through in Joins and Set Operations.

"Find consecutive missing IDs" (gaps in sequence):

"Customers who haven't bought in last 90 days":

"Most popular item per customer":

-- pause --
Stored procedures, functions, triggers.

Programmable schema objects, useful in some scenarios, harmful in others.

Stored procedure (SP), named procedural code that can wrap multiple sequel statements:

User-defined function (UDF), returns a value or table; usable in queries.

sequel Server scalar UDFs are slow for four named reasons, and knowing the reasons is what makes this an answer rather than folklore.
Microsoft's own documentation lists them: iterative invocation, the engine "invokes UDFs iteratively, once per qualifying tuple", paying a context switch each time;
lack of costing, the optimizer costs relational operators but not scalar ones, so the UDF is effectively free in the estimate and arbitrarily expensive in reality; interpreted execution, the body runs statement by statement with no cross-statement optimization;
and serial execution, "sequel Server doesn't allow intra-query parallelism in queries that invoke UDFs".
That last one is the nastiest, because a single scalar UDF in the SELECT list forces the whole query to a serial plan, including the scan and join that had nothing to do with it.

sequel Server 2019 (15.x) added scalar UDF inlining, which rewrites qualifying UDFs into relational expressions so the optimizer can see and cost them.
It requires database compatibility level 150, and it is conditional: the docs carry a long list of disqualifying constructs (time-dependent functions like GETDATE(), table variables, STRING_AGG, multiple RETURN statements after 2019 CU5, and more, several of which were added in cumulative updates).
Check with the catalog view rather than assuming:

is_inlineable = 1 means the body qualifies; it does not promise inlining happened, because the calling context has its own requirements (a UDF in ORDER BY or GROUP BY, or a calling query with a C T E, disqualifies it). Confirm in the plan: an inlined UDF leaves no node in the plan X M L.
Inline table-valued functions were always different, they are expanded into the calling query like a view, and never had the scalar problem. Multi-statement TVFs ( RETURNS @t TABLE. BEGIN.
END ) do have a related problem: they materialise into a table variable, and the optimizer historically had to guess their row count rather than derive it (a fixed guess of 100 rows on sequel Server 2014 and later, 1 before that).
sequel Server 2017 (14.x) at compatibility level 140 addresses this with interleaved execution, which pauses optimization, runs the MSTVF,
and feeds the real row count back into the rest of the plan, so on a modern instance at a modern compatibility level this is a much smaller problem than the folklore suggests.

Postgres Q L has two separate levers here and it is worth keeping them apart. The first is inlining: the planner can fold a sequel-language function whose body is a single SELECT into the calling query, the way it folds a view, so the optimizer sees through it.
PL or pgSQL functions are never inlined, they always execute as their own black box, whatever their volatility label.
The second is volatility, VOLATILE (the default), STABLE, IMMUTABLE, which tells the planner how freely it may evaluate the function: only IMMUTABLE functions may appear in an index expression, and STABLE / IMMUTABLE let the planner evaluate a call once instead of per row.
So the practical rule for a dot NET developer porting a scalar UDF is: express it as a sequel-language function if you want it optimized away, and label its volatility honestly.
Mislabelling a function IMMUTABLE when it reads tables is worse than a performance bug, the planner is then licensed to evaluate it once and reuse the value, and to build an index on it, so the wrong label can produce wrong answers.

In the real world: a reporting query on sequel Server went from seconds to minutes after a release that changed nothing about it.
The release had added a computed column to the orders table, TaxAmount AS dbo.CalcTax(Subtotal, TaxRate), using an existing scalar UDF, for a completely different feature.
Every query touching orders now had a scalar UDF in its plan, and every one of them dropped to a serial plan on a server sized for parallel reporting. The report was not slow because it computed tax; it was slow because it was no longer allowed to use more than one core.
Nothing in the report's own code or plan cost pointed at the cause, the giveaway was a DegreeOfParallelism of 1 on a query that had always gone parallel, and the plan X M L's NonParallelPlanReason attribute reading TSQLUserDefinedFunctionsNotParallelizable.
The first attempted fix was to add PERSISTED to the computed column, and it did not work, which is the part worth remembering.
The optimizer loads computed-column definitions during binding, so the UDF is present in the query's metadata whether or not the column is persisted and whether or not the query references it; parallelism is disabled either way.
Nor does sequel Server 2019's scalar UDF inlining rescue this case, the documented execution-context requirements exclude a UDF used "in a computed column or a check constraint definition".
What actually worked was removing the function from the column definition: the tax expression was inlined into the computed column directly, and the UDF kept only for the call sites that could use it as an inline TVF.
The transferable lesson: on sequel Server, a scalar UDF is not local, putting one in a computed column or a check constraint spreads its cost to every statement that touches the table, and no amount of persisting makes it local again.

Trigger, auto-fires on INSERT or UPDATE or DELETE.

The trigger question that separates engines, and catches dot NET developers hardest. Postgres Q L lets you choose granularity: "A trigger that is marked FOR EACH ROW is called once for every row that the operation modifies.
In contrast, a trigger that is marked FOR EACH STATEMENT only executes once for any given operation, regardless of how many rows it modifies". NEW and OLD only exist in the row-level form.

sequel Server has no FOR EACH ROW clause at all. Look at the CREATE TRIGGER syntax: there is nowhere to put it.
Every T sequel DML trigger is statement-level, fires once however many rows changed, including zero, which is why Microsoft's own guidance is to open each trigger with IF (ROWCOUNT_BIG() = 0) RETURN;, and sees the affected rows as two set-valued pseudo-tables, inserted and deleted:

The first version is not a strawman, it is the shape Microsoft's documentation uses as its worked example of the bug, noting that "the expression to the right of an assignment expression in an UPDATE statement can be only a single value, not a list of values",
so the trigger silently picks one row from inserted and applies it once.
It is correct only for a genuinely single-row INSERT. VALUES (.), and wrong for a multi-row VALUES list, INSERT. SELECT, MERGE, and E F Core's batched inserts.

SqlBulkCopy deserves its own sentence, because the usual claim about it is backwards.
By default SqlBulkCopy fires no insert triggers at all, you have to opt in with SqlBulkCopyOptions.FireTriggers, documented as "cause the server to fire the insert triggers for the rows being inserted into the database".
So a bulk load against a table with a counter trigger has two possible failure modes depending on one constructor flag: without it the counter never moves, with it the trigger fires once per batch with a multi-row inserted and the naive version adds one.
Both are wrong, they are wrong in opposite directions, and which one you get is invisible at the sequel layer.

That last one is the trap. E F Core batches multiple Add ed entities into a single multi-row INSERT statement, so the same application code that behaved correctly with SaveChanges() after one Add starts corrupting the counter as soon as someone adds two entities before saving.
Nothing in the C sharp looks different. (Postgres Q L is not exposed to this: a FOR EACH ROW trigger fires per row regardless of how the rows arrived.
Its statement-level triggers can see all affected rows through transition tables declared with REFERENCING NEW TABLE AS., which the docs restrict to AFTER triggers.)

When to use these:

Stored procedures: encapsulate multi-step business logic when the logic should run server-side. In modern dot NET apps, most logic is in C sharp; SPs less common.
Functions: clean up repeated expressions in queries; reuse domain calculations. Watch perf on T sequel scalar UDFs.
Triggers: audit trails, derived columns. Use sparingly, hidden behavior. Most teams prefer app-level interceptors.

For most modern apps: prefer app-side logic in C sharp (testable, version-controlled). Use SPs or triggers when:
Cross-app integrity needs server enforcement.
Performance demands hand-tuned T sequel.
Legacy schema requires it.

In the real world: an inventory service on sequel Server kept a denormalised products.stock_on_hand up to date with an AFTER INSERT trigger on stock_movements, written in the single-row style.
It was correct for four years, because every write came through an A P I endpoint that inserted one movement at a time. Then a bulk-import feature landed, using SqlBulkCopy to load supplier deliveries, hundreds of movements per batch.
The first version passed no options, so no trigger fired and imported stock never registered at all; someone spotted that in testing and added SqlBulkCopyOptions.FireTriggers, which turned a visible bug into an invisible one.
The trigger now fired once per batch, saw a multi-row inserted, and incremented stock by the quantity of one arbitrary row in it. Stock levels drifted low, the reorder logic fired against wrong numbers, and the finance reconciliation that eventually caught it was three weeks downstream of the cause.
The trigger was never reviewed during the bulk-import work because nobody involved knew there was a trigger.
Two things came out of it: the trigger was rewritten set-based against inserted, and the team started treating "which triggers fire on this table" as a required section of the design review for any new write path. Hidden behaviour is only hidden until it is wrong.

-- pause --
Interval overlap and packing.

Any schema with a valid_from / valid_to, starts_at / ends_at, or effective_from / effective_to pair generates the same two questions, and they come up in interviews as "find double-booked rooms" and "merge overlapping subscription periods".

The overlap predicate. Two intervals overlap if and only if each starts before the other ends:

That is the whole rule, and it is worth being able to derive rather than recall: the negation is "A ends before B starts, or B ends before A starts", and the predicate is its complement.
Candidates usually reach for BETWEEN and enumerate cases, "B starts inside A, or B ends inside A", and the case that gets forgotten is B completely containing A, where neither of B's endpoints falls inside A at all.
Enumerating gets you there only if you remember all three; deriving the complement gets you there every time.

Closed versus half-open is the decision that causes the bugs. With < on both sides you are treating intervals as half-open, [start, end): a booking ending at 10:00 and one starting at 10:00 do not overlap. With <= they do.
Store times half-open and the arithmetic works out, adjacent intervals meet exactly, there is no ambiguous instant, and end - start is the duration. Store them closed ( ends_at = 09:59:59 ) and you have baked a granularity assumption into the data that breaks the day someone stores milliseconds.

Preventing overlaps is a schema question rather than a query one, and it is covered in Schema Design (Postgres Q L exclusion constraints) and Joins and Set Operations (effective-dated joins and what happens when overlaps do get stored).
The rest of this section is the query problem the interview actually asks about: given rows that do overlap, produce their union.

Packing intervals, collapsing overlapping rows into their union, is gaps-and-islands with a different key. An interval starts a new island when its start is later than the greatest end seen so far in the group:

The running MAX(ends_at) over all preceding rows, not LAG(ends_at), is the part people get wrong.
LAG compares against the immediately previous interval, which fails when a long interval completely contains a short one that sorts after it: the short one's end is earlier, LAG says "no overlap", and the containing interval gets split.
Note the explicit ROWS frames: with ORDER BY and no frame clause the default is RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, which includes the current row's own ends_at.
prev_max_end would then never be earlier than the row's own start, starts_at > prev_max_end would never be true, and every row would collapse into a single island. This query runs unchanged on Postgres Q L, sequel Server 2012+, and MySQL 8.0+.

The related question, "total time covered", is why packing matters commercially. Summing ends_at - starts_at over raw rows double-counts every overlap; summing it over the packed result is the true covered duration.
If an interviewer asks for "total hours a machine was down given overlapping incident records", they are asking for packing, and the wrong answer is a SUM that looks simpler and reports more downtime than the day contained.

In the real world: an S L A credit calculation summed the durations of incident records per customer per month.
Incidents were opened by three different systems, synthetic monitoring, the on-call engineer, and the customer's own ticket, so a single outage routinely produced two or three overlapping rows.
The sum counted the same minutes two or three times, and once the total crossed the S L A threshold the contract paid an automatic credit. The company had been paying credits for downtime that had not happened, for long enough that the finance team treated it as a normal cost line.
It was caught when a customer disputed a credit in their own favour's opposite direction, their engineer pointed out the outage was ninety minutes and the credit was based on four hours. The fix was to pack the intervals before summing.
What makes it worth retelling is that the query had no bug in the usual sense: every row was real, the arithmetic was right, and the error was entirely in treating overlapping intervals as if they were disjoint.

-- pause --
Reading the plan: window function versus APPLY.

The reader who can write both forms of top-N-per-group but cannot say which plan each produces is the one who gets stuck on the follow-up. Here are the two shapes, with the operator names each engine actually prints.

Window function, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY category_id ORDER BY sales DESC) filtered to rn <= 3:

The names differ, the shape does not. Segment marks where each partition begins and Sequence Project assigns the numbers, together they are sequel Server's ROW_NUMBER, and Postgres Q L does both inside one WindowAgg.
Being able to say "the Segment / Sequence Project pair is the window function" is a cheap way to show you have read one of these plans rather than read about them.

Read it bottom-up. Every row of products is scanned, every row is sorted, Segment marks where each partition begins, Sequence Project assigns the row numbers, and only then does Filter throw most of them away.
The two operators to point at in an interview are the Sort, its cost is driven by the whole table, not by the three rows per category you asked for, and the Filter, which sits the numbering and therefore cannot reduce the work it.
The optimizer has no way to stop early: row number 4 cannot be known to exceed 3 until rows 1 to 3 have been assigned, and that requires the partition sorted.

APPLY / LATERAL with an index on (category_id, sales DESC):

No Sort anywhere, the index already provides sales DESC order within each category, so Top / Limit stops after three index entries. The inner side runs once per category, and each run touches three rows plus the seek.

What to look at in the actual plan, in priority order:

Actual rows versus estimated rows on the scan. Both plans are fine when they agree; the window plan's Sort is where a bad estimate turns into a spill.
A Sort with a spill warning (sequel Server shows a warning triangle and SpillToTempDb; Postgres Q L's EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS) prints Sort Method: external merge Disk: NkB ). A sort that spills has stopped being a C P U cost and become an I O cost.
Rows read versus rows returned. Millions read, dozens returned, for a screen showing one customer, is the signature of a window function applied to a driving set of one, the case where APPLY wins outright.
Whether the Index Seek is Ordered: True. If the index does not supply the order the inner ORDER BY needs, a Sort reappears inside the loop and now runs once per outer row, which is the worst of both plans.

The rule that follows from the shapes rather than from benchmarks: the window function does one pass and one sort over everything, so it wins when you need most of the rows anyway (a full report over all categories).
APPLY does a seek per outer row, so it wins when the outer set is small and the index makes each seek cheap (one customer's last three orders).
Neither is universally faster, and an interviewer asking "which is faster?" is usually checking whether you say "it depends on the driving set size and whether the index supports the inner sort" rather than picking one.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

-- pause --
"Find Nth highest" decision matrix.

Always clarify with the interviewer.

-- pause --
Gaps and islands, visualized.

The math: when dates are consecutive, "date - rn" is constant. When there's a gap, rn ticks up one but date ticks up two, so "date - rn" jumps. Each constant value = one "island."

-- pause --
"Customers and their last 3 orders" (Top-N per group, real-world).

Pivots beautifully when generating customer reports, the top-3 history at a glance.

-- pause --
Year-over-year growth.

The combination of GROUP BY (year aggregation) + window function (LAG over years) is common in reporting.

-- pause --
Cohort analysis.

This is a common analytics problem; the C T E chain makes it manageable.

-- pause --
Trigger for soft delete cascade.

Hidden cascade behavior. Useful but surprising for new engineers, document it. Many teams prefer explicit app-side cascades.

-- pause --
Dynamic top-N parameter.

Or as a one-shot C T E inside the calling code. Encapsulation in a function makes sense if the same query is reused across many app paths.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

SELECT TOP 1 / LIMIT 1 for "Nth highest", only gets the 1st. Add ORDER BY DESC OFFSET N-1 for the Nth.
ROW_NUMBER when ties matter. Always asking "what's the tie behavior?" before solving, DENSE_RANK or RANK might be the right answer.
Nested aggregation without C T E. Pure sequel SUM(MAX(x)) doesn't work directly. Use a C T E: aggregate first, aggregate again on the result.
Self-join without canonical pair order. Returns (A, B) and (B, A). Use WHERE a.id < b.id or LEAST or GREATEST to canonicalize.
Recursive C T E without termination check. Infinite recursion. Anchor must produce rows; recursive must eventually stop. Add cycle detection on graphs.
PIVOT / UNPIVOT vendor-specific syntax. Conditional aggregation is portable. Use vendor PIVOT when concise; switch to CASE for portability.
Slow median via PERCENTILE_CONT on huge tables. It's accurate but expensive. Approximate methods or pre-computed percentiles for analytics.
* COUNT() FILTER (WHERE.) ** (Postgres Q L syntax) versus SUM(CASE.) portability. Both work; pick consistency for codebase.
Triggers with cross-table cascade silently breaking later changes. The trigger does X; six months later, X conflicts with new business rule. Triggers are hidden behavior, document or move to app code.
Stored procs with embedded business logic, no source control. Live in the DB; not versioned with app code. Treat schema and procs as code (migrations, git).
Functions that hide complex queries. A function called get_widget_count_for_customer(.) that's actually a 200-line query, slow, hard to optimize, hard to debug. Keep functions simple.
COUNT(DISTINCT) over huge data. Forces a sort or hash over every value.
The approximate alternative is HyperLogLog, and it is not available everywhere: sequel Server 2019 (15.x)+ has built-in APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT(expr), documented as guaranteeing "up to a 2% error rate within a 97% probability" and as being less likely to spill than an exact count.
Postgres Q L has no built-in equivalent, you install the postgresql-hll extension (Citus Data) and use hll_add_agg() / hll_cardinality(). MySQL has neither.
The other reason to reach for a sketch rather than a count: sketches merge, so daily sketches can be combined into a weekly distinct count, which daily counts cannot be, but note that only the extension gives you that, because APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT returns a bigint, not a storable sketch.
Assuming WITH RECURSIVE is portable. T sequel has no RECURSIVE keyword, the same C T E is written with a plain WITH. It is a syntax error, not a behaviour difference, so at least it fails loudly.
A recursive C T E with no ceiling on Postgres Q L. sequel Server stops at 100 levels by default and MySQL at 1000; Postgres Q L has no limit and will run a cycle until it exhausts disk or memory. Carry a depth counter or use the CYCLE clause (14+).
ROW_NUMBER in a gaps-and-islands query over data with duplicate keys. The date-minus-row-number identity only holds with one row per entity per interval. Use DENSE_RANK, or de-duplicate first.
ROWS n PRECEDING read as "n days". It is n rows. Over a table with missing days the window silently widens in calendar terms. Join a calendar table, or use Postgres Q L's RANGE. INTERVAL frame, which sequel Server does not support.
NOT IN against a subquery that can return NULL. Returns zero rows, always, and looks like a data problem. NOT EXISTS instead. Bites hardest in relational-division and anti-join queries.
Writing a sequel Server trigger as if it fires per row. It fires once per statement with inserted / deleted as sets. Correct for single-row inserts, wrong for INSERT. SELECT, MERGE, and E F Core's batched saves.
SqlBulkCopy fails the other way: it fires no insert triggers unless you pass SqlBulkCopyOptions.FireTriggers, so the counter silently never moves.
Closed intervals for validity periods. BETWEEN effective_from AND effective_to with effective_to equal to the next row's effective_from matches two rows at the boundary. Store half-open, [from, to), and compare with >= from AND < to.
PIVOT over a table instead of a projected derived table. sequel Server's PIVOT implicitly groups by every column it can see, so an extra column on the base table fragments the output. Always feed it a derived table containing exactly the grouping, spreading, and aggregated columns.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Find Nth highest: DENSE_RANK = N (handles ties cleanly) or LIMIT or OFFSET.
Top-N per group: ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY group ORDER BY value DESC) then filter rn <= N in C T E.
Running totals / moving averages: SUM or AVG OVER (ORDER BY. ROWS BETWEEN.).
Gaps and islands: subtract ROW_NUMBER from the date, consecutive values share the same island_grp.
Median: PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY.) or ROW_NUMBER + COUNT portable.
Pivot: conditional aggregation ( SUM(CASE WHEN. THEN. END) ) is portable; vendor PIVOT operators are concise but tied to dialect.
Hierarchical queries: recursive C T E with anchor + recursive UNION ALL; ARRAY for paths; cycle detection for graphs.
Self-join pair finding: JOIN t1 t2 ON. AND t1.id < t2.id for canonical pairs.
Stored procs / functions / triggers: powerful but hidden behavior. Default to app-side logic; use server-side when integrity, perf, or legacy demands.
Interval overlap: a.start < b.end AND b.start < a.end, half-open, one predicate, not three cases.
Packing intervals: running MAX(end) over all preceding rows, not LAG(end), flags a new island; cumulative SUM of the flag is the group key. Sum durations over the packed result, never the raw rows.
Ties without a window function: TOP (n) WITH TIES (sequel Server) / FETCH FIRST n ROWS WITH TIES (Postgres Q L 13+). No MySQL equivalent.
Plan shapes: window function = scan + sort the whole partition, then filter; APPLY = seek per outer row, no sort, stops at n. Which wins depends on the driving-set size and whether an index supplies the inner ordering.

Expected interview questions:

"Find the second-highest salary.", Show all three: subquery ( MAX < MAX ), LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1 on DISTINCT, DENSE_RANK = 2. Mention tie semantics.
"Find top 3 products per category.", ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY category ORDER BY sales DESC) in C T E, filter rn <= 3.
"Find consecutive login days per user.", Gaps and islands: login_date - ROW_NUMBER * 1 day, GROUP BY result.
"Find pairs of products often bought together.", Self-join order_items on order_id with p1 < p2 to canonicalize pairs; GROUP BY pair; ORDER BY count DESC.
"Pivot months across columns.", Conditional aggregation: SUM(CASE WHEN month = 'Jan' THEN sales END) AS jan,..
"Show org chart with depth.", Recursive C T E: anchor where parent_id IS NULL with depth set to 0; recursive joins on parent_id with depth+1.
"Find duplicate emails.", GROUP BY email HAVING COUNT() > 1. To find specific rows: WHERE email IN (subquery) or window function COUNT() OVER (PARTITION BY email).
"Find double-booked rooms.", Self-join on room_id with a.starts_at < b.ends_at AND b.starts_at < a.ends_at AND a.id < b.id. Derive the predicate rather than enumerating cases; the follow-up is always "how do you prevent it".
"Total downtime, given overlapping incident records.", Pack the intervals first (running MAX(end) to island flag to SUM over the flag to GROUP BY ), then sum. Summing raw durations double-counts every overlap.
"Which is faster, the window function or CROSS APPLY ?", Describe the two plan shapes, then answer conditionally: APPLY for a small driving set with a supporting index, window function for a full pass. Naming Segment / Sequence Project / WindowAgg is what makes it sound like you have read a plan.
"Your trigger increments a counter. What happens on a bulk insert?", On sequel Server, the trigger fires once with a multi-row inserted table, and the naive version applies one increment. On Postgres Q L, FOR EACH ROW fires per row and is fine; FOR EACH STATEMENT has the same problem.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, MERGE / UPSERT race conditions.

Q: I use MERGE INTO target USING source ON target.id = source.id WHEN MATCHED UPDATE. WHEN NOT MATCHED INSERT. for upserts. What's the race condition?-- think --

A: Two concurrent sessions can both pass the WHEN NOT MATCHED check before either commits, then both try to INSERT the same key. Under READ COMMITTED isolation, MERGE doesn't acquire a lock that prevents the second session from seeing "no match" at the moment of its own check.
Result: either a primary key violation (one session fails) or duplicate rows (if no unique constraint). The classic race window between the lookup and the insert.

Cross-Q: How do you fix it without going to SERIALIZABLE for everything?-- think --

A: Add WITH (HOLDLOCK) to the MERGE target: MERGE INTO target WITH (HOLDLOCK) USING source.. HOLDLOCK takes a range lock that prevents concurrent inserts in the key range until the MERGE commits. The other safe pattern: stop using MERGE and write the upsert as INSERT.
WHERE NOT EXISTS inside a SERIALIZABLE transaction, or use Postgres's INSERT. ON CONFLICT DO UPDATE which is properly atomic. Many seniors avoid MERGE entirely because it has multiple known footguns beyond just this race (silent NULL handling, trigger ordering surprises).

Cross-Q²: Why is INSERT. ON CONFLICT DO UPDATE (Postgres) considered safer than MERGE?-- think --

A: ON CONFLICT operates at the index level, it asks the DB engine "try to insert; if the unique index complains, do this instead." The atomicity is guaranteed by the index's unique constraint, which already serializes concurrent inserts.
There's no time window between "check" and "insert" because there's no separate check, the engine atomically attempts the insert and dispatches the conflict path. MERGE's WHEN NOT MATCHED is a sequel-level predicate evaluated separately from the insert, which is the source of the race.
sequel Server has no ON CONFLICT equivalent, there is no upsert syntax there other than MERGE, so on sequel Server the choices are MERGE. WITH (HOLDLOCK), or INSERT.
WHERE NOT EXISTS with the same HOLDLOCK hint (or under SERIALIZABLE ) so the check takes a range lock, or simply attempting the INSERT and catching error 2627 / 2601 (unique constraint / unique index violation) and falling back to an UPDATE.
That last one is the closest thing to the index-level semantics and is what most retry-tolerant dot NET code ends up doing. Aaron Bertrand's "Use Caution with sequel Server's MERGE Statement" is the standard catalogue of the other footguns.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Idempotent inserts.

Q: I have a webhook handler that may receive the same event twice. How do I make the insert idempotent at the DB level?-- think --

A: Unique constraint on the event's natural key (the provider's event ID), then use INSERT. ON CONFLICT (event_id) DO NOTHING (Postgres) or INSERT. WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM events WHERE event_id = @id) (sequel Server).
The DB enforces uniqueness; duplicate sends silently succeed without inserting. App code can check rows-affected if it needs to know whether this was the first time.

Cross-Q: What if the webhook provider doesn't give a stable event ID, they only send timestamp + payload?-- think --

A: Manufacture one. Hash the payload ( SHA-256 of the canonical Jason) and use that as the deduplication key. The risk: two genuinely different events with identical payloads would collide, usually impossible in practice because timestamps differ, but worth considering.
Some teams use (provider, timestamp_truncated_to_second, hash_of_payload) as the composite key. The principle: idempotency requires a deduplication key the system can compute deterministically from the input.

Cross-Q²: Idempotency at insert is easy. What's the equivalent for updates, making "set status to X" idempotent across retries?-- think --

A: Two patterns. (1) State machine guarded transitions, UPDATE orders SET status = 'Shipped' WHERE id = @id AND status = 'Paid'. If a retry runs after the first succeeded, the WHERE filters out the row and rows-affected = 0; the app knows the state already matches.
(2) Version-based optimistic concurrency, include a version or etag column; the update specifies WHERE version = @expected; retries with a stale version are silently no-ops or fail loudly.
The principle is the same as insert idempotency: the operation must be safe to repeat because the DB filters out the no-op case.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Pagination: OFFSET versus keyset.

Q: What's wrong with SELECT * FROM orders ORDER BY created_at DESC LIMIT 20 OFFSET 10000 ?-- think --

A: OFFSET is O(N) in the offset, the engine still has to compute and discard the first 10000 rows before returning the 20 you want. Page 1 is fast; page 500 is glacial.
Worse, results can shift between page requests as new rows arrive at the top, causing duplicates or missing rows (a row at index 99 moves to index 119 when 20 new rows insert, so page 6 still shows it).

Cross-Q: What's keyset (cursor) pagination and how does it fix this?-- think --

A: Instead of "skip N rows," you say "give me rows after this position." SELECT * FROM orders WHERE (created_at, id) < (@last_created_at, @last_id) ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC LIMIT 20. The (created_at, id) tuple is the cursor; the next request passes the last row's values.
The cost is one index descent plus a scan of the rows you actually return, so page 1000 costs the same as page 1, provided an index leads with (created_at, id) in that order. Stable under inserts: new rows at the top don't shift the cursor, so no duplicates.

That row-value comparison is the elegant form, and it is not portable.
Markus Winand's compatibility survey (use-the-index-luke.com) puts Postgres Q L (since 8.4) and Db2 in the "supports row values and uses them for index access" column; sequel Server has no row-value comparison at all; MySQL evaluates it correctly but cannot use it as an index access predicate;
Oracle parses it but rejects range operators on it ( ORA-01796 ).
On sequel Server you expand it by hand, WHERE created_at < @last_created_at OR (created_at = @last_created_at AND id < @last_id), which is logically identical and gives the optimizer a harder time, since it now has to recognise that the OR describes one contiguous index range.
E F Core has no link syntax for row values either (dotnet or efcore#26822), so keyset pagination in E F Core is written as the expanded predicate or as raw sequel.

Cross-Q²: Keyset is great for "next page," but how do you jump to "page 47" directly?-- think --

A: You can't, cleanly. That's the trade-off, keyset gives you "next" and "previous" but not random access by page number.
If random access matters (admin UIs, search-with-pagination), use a hybrid: OFFSET pagination for the first N pages (where OFFSET is cheap), keyset for "next" beyond that, and disable jumping to arbitrary high pages.
Many modern apps just hide page numbers entirely ("Load more" or infinite scroll) and avoid the question. For UIs that need it (older admin tools), accept the OFFSET cost or pre-compute page boundaries in a materialized view.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Gaps and islands.

Q: Explain the trick behind login_date - (ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY user_id ORDER BY login_date)) * INTERVAL '1 day' for finding consecutive-login streaks.-- think --

A: Consecutive dates differ from their row-number-times-one-day by a constant. For login dates [May 1, May 2, May 3], ROW_NUMBER is [1, 2, 3], so date - row_number 1day is [Apr 30, Apr 30, Apr 30], same value across the streak.
A gap (May 1, May 2, May 4) breaks it: [Apr 30, Apr 30, May 1], the third row jumps to a new group. GROUP BY that derived value and you get one row per streak with MIN(date), MAX(date), COUNT().

Cross-Q: What if logins are timestamps (not dates) and a "streak" means logins within 30 minutes of the previous one?-- think --

A: Change the comparison from "same date" to "previous timestamp within 30 minutes." Use LAG(login_at) OVER (PARTITION BY user_id ORDER BY login_at) to get the previous timestamp; flag a new session when the gap exceeds 30 minutes; cumulative sum of those flags becomes the session ID.
The pattern: SUM(CASE WHEN login_at - LAG(login_at) OVER (.) > INTERVAL '30 minutes' THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) OVER (.) AS session_id. That's sessionization, the same gaps-and-islands shape generalized to any "consecutive within X" predicate.

Cross-Q²: What if a user's "streak" has to span exactly business days (weekdays, skipping Saturdays or Sundays)?-- think --

A: The pure date-minus-row-number trick breaks because consecutive business days (Friday to Monday) have a 3-day calendar gap but should count as consecutive. The fix: introduce a business_day_number column or computed value, number of business days since some epoch.
Use a calendar table ( dim_date with is_business_day ) and run a window function on the business_day_number. Then business_day_number - ROW_NUMBER gives constant groups for consecutive business days. Calendar tables earn their keep here, the math gets messy without them.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Top-N per group.

Q: I need the top 3 best-selling products per category. Walk me through the window-function solution and the LATERAL alternative.-- think --

A: Window function: WITH ranked AS (SELECT category, product, sales, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY category ORDER BY sales DESC) AS rn FROM products) SELECT FROM ranked WHERE rn <= 3. The optimizer sorts once per partition, assigns row numbers, and the outer query filters.
LATERAL (Postgres) / CROSS APPLY (sequel Server): for each category, run an independent inner query. SELECT c.id, p. FROM categories c CROSS JOIN LATERAL (SELECT * FROM products WHERE category_id = c.id ORDER BY sales DESC LIMIT 3) p.

Cross-Q: When does LATERAL beat the window function?-- think --

A: When (a) the inner ORDER BY has a covering index, each LATERAL call is an index-only top-N scan, and (b) the partition is large but you only need a handful of rows per group.
The mechanism, not a multiplier, is the answer: the window function must sort the entire partition before it can know which rows are numbered 1, 2, 3, so its work is proportional to the partition size;
LATERAL seeks into the index and stops after three entries, so its work is proportional to the number of outer rows times the rows you keep.
That gap widens with partition size and closes to nothing when you need most of the rows anyway.
Where it inverts: if the index does not supply the inner ORDER BY, each LATERAL call sorts the category from scratch, now you are doing the same sort, once per outer row, which is strictly worse than doing it once. Check the plan for a Sort on the inner side before claiming the win.
See Reading the plan: window function versus APPLY.

Cross-Q²: ROW_NUMBER, RANK, DENSE_RANK, which one for "top 3 with ties"?-- think --

A: Depends on what "with ties" means. "Top 3 rows, ties broken arbitrarily" to ROW_NUMBER (exactly 3 rows). "Top 3 ranks, including all ties at each rank" to RANK (could return 4 rows if rank 3 has ties; rank 4 is skipped to rank 5).
"Top 3 distinct values, all rows at those values" to DENSE_RANK (could return many rows if there are large ties at each of the three ranks).
Always ask the interviewer or PM which is wanted, only ROW_NUMBER promises a row count, so if the caller loops over the result and does something per row, the other two can hand it more work than it budgeted for.
TOP (3) WITH TIES / FETCH FIRST 3 ROWS WITH TIES expresses the middle case without a window function.

-- pause --
Drill 6, Hierarchy modeling.

Q: Adjacency list, materialized path, nested set, closure table, when do you use each?-- think --

A: Adjacency list ( parent_id column), simplest, easy to insert or update, queries for ancestors or descendants need recursive C T E. Default choice. Materialized path ( '/electronics or laptops or gaming' ), fast descendant queries via prefix LIKE, expensive renames.
Good for read-heavy hierarchies that rarely restructure. Nested set (lft or rgt values), extremely fast "all descendants of X" via range query, but inserts are O(N) (shift rgt values). Academic favorite, painful in practice.
Closure table, separate table with (ancestor_id, descendant_id, depth) for every pair. Fast queries in both directions, but write amplification (N inserts per node added at depth N).

Cross-Q: When does adjacency list with recursive C T E become too slow?-- think --

A: When the hierarchy is deep (10+ levels) and queries traverse the whole tree frequently, or when you need "depth of node X" / "all ancestors" in tight loops. Recursive C T E costs scale with tree size, 1000 nodes times 10 levels = 10k row traversal per query.
For org charts up to 5 levels deep and 1000 seconds of employees, it's fine; for category trees in a large catalog (10k categories, 6 levels), profile both adjacency list and closure table.
Modern Postgres or sequel Server have optimized recursive C T E execution that handles most realistic hierarchies.

Cross-Q²: Closure table sounds ideal, why isn't it the default?-- think --

A: Write amplification. Inserting a leaf node at depth 5 means inserting 5 closure rows (one for each ancestor). Moving a subtree of 1000 nodes one level up means rewriting 1000 closure entries per ancestor, combinatorial.
For read-mostly hierarchies (categories, org chart that rarely reorganizes), closure tables are great. For write-heavy hierarchies (threaded comments, dynamic taxonomies), the write cost dominates.
Most teams start with adjacency list and migrate to closure table only when query latency on hierarchy traversal becomes a measured problem.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Bitemporal modeling.

Q: What's bitemporal modeling and what problem does it solve?-- think --

A: Two independent time dimensions per row: valid time (when the fact is true in the real world, "this employee's salary is $80k from Jan 1 to Mar 31") and system time (when the system recorded that fact, "we entered this row on Feb 15 at 3pm").
The combination lets you answer two questions independently: "what was true on date X?" and "what did the system know on date Y?" Critical for finance, insurance, and any domain where retroactive corrections happen.

Cross-Q: Give me a scenario where the two times diverge meaningfully.-- think --

A: Insurance claim filed Feb 15 for an accident on Jan 10. System time of the row is Feb 15; valid time is Jan 10. Three days later (Feb 18), the adjuster discovers an error in the claim, they correct it. The new row has system time Feb 18, valid time still Jan 10 (the accident hasn't changed).
A query "what did we believe about the Jan 10 claim, as of Feb 16?" returns the original (wrong) value. A query "what's the corrected value?" returns the Feb 18 row.
Audit and regulatory reports often need exactly this distinction, "show me what we reported at the time" versus "show me what we currently believe."

Cross-Q²: How do you implement bitemporal in sequel?-- think --

A: Each row has four columns: valid_from, valid_to, system_from, system_to. UPDATE becomes "close out the current row (set system_to = NOW() ) and insert a new row with the change (new system_from = NOW() )." Validity ranges manage real-world time.
Postgres tstzrange + EXCLUDE constraints prevent overlapping valid ranges. sequel Server can use temporal tables for the system-time dimension but you implement valid-time manually.
The queries are heavyweight ("rows valid at time X as we knew them at time Y"), and tooling is sparse, this is why bitemporal is reserved for domains that need it. Most apps live happily on system-versioned-only (temporal tables).

-- pause --
Drill 8, Slowly changing dimensions.

Q: What are SCD types 1, 2, and 3 in dimensional modeling?-- think --

A: A dimension table ( dim_customer ) describes entities, and those entities change over time. SCD Type 1, overwrite the value, no history (just UPDATE dim_customer SET region = 'EU' WHERE id = 7 ). Fast, simple, no audit.
SCD Type 2, preserve history by adding a new row with the change; old row gets valid_to = NOW(), new row gets valid_from = NOW() and a fresh surrogate key. The fact table FK references the version that was valid at fact time.
SCD Type 3, add a column for the previous value ( region, previous_region ). Limited history (one prior value), simple queries, no versioning explosion.

Cross-Q: When is SCD Type 2 worth the complexity?-- think --

A: When historical analysis must reflect the dimension state at fact time, "what region was this customer in when they made this purchase?" If the customer moved from US to EU last year, all their old US purchases should still show "US region" in reports, not "EU region." Type 1 would lose that.
Type 2 lets the fact table FK to the right historical version. Necessary for: revenue attribution by region over time, regulatory reporting, anything where "rewriting history" is unacceptable.

Cross-Q²: SCD Type 2 explodes the dimension table size. How do you keep it manageable?-- think --

A: (1) Only version columns that matter for analysis, don't bump a new dim row when the customer's email changes; only when their region, segment, or other analytical attribute changes. (2) Date-granularity changes, collapse same-day changes into one row.
(3) Archive old versions, for facts older than 7 years, you may not need every version; keep current + most-recent-prior. (4) Hash-based change detection, only insert a new version if a hash of the analytical columns differs from the current row.
SCD Type 2 needs governance about what changes deserve a new version, otherwise you accumulate noise.

-- pause --
Drill 9, Pivot patterns.

Q: I have sales(month, type, amount) and need columns (month, A_total, B_total, C_total). Walk me through PIVOT, UNPIVOT, and conditional aggregation.-- think --

A: Conditional aggregation (portable, what I'd write): SELECT month, SUM(CASE WHEN type='A' THEN amount ELSE 0 END) AS a_total, SUM(CASE WHEN type='B' THEN amount ELSE 0 END) AS b_total FROM sales GROUP BY month.
sequel Server PIVOT operator (concise, vendor-specific): SELECT month, [A], [B], [C] FROM sales PIVOT (SUM(amount) FOR type IN ([A], [B], [C])) p. UNPIVOT does the reverse, wide table to narrow (month, type, amount).

Cross-Q: What if the set of type values isn't known at query time, "pivot whatever types exist this month"?-- think --

A: Dynamic pivot. Build the sequel string at runtime: SELECT @cols = STRING_AGG(QUOTENAME(type), ',') FROM (SELECT DISTINCT type FROM sales) t; EXEC('SELECT month, ' + @cols + ' FROM sales PIVOT (SUM(amount) FOR type IN (' + @cols + ')) p').
Dynamic sequel is brittle, sequel injection if not careful, plan-cache bloat, hard to test. Many teams instead pivot in the application layer: query the long-form data, pivot in C sharp/Python. The DB returns (month, type, amount) rows and the app shapes them into the wide format.
Cleaner separation, no dynamic sequel.

Cross-Q²: A reporting query needs 50 columns from a pivot over the last 50 weeks of data. Is that a smell?-- think --

A: Strong smell, usually yes. 50 dynamic columns means the schema of the result depends on the data, which makes downstream consumers (BI tools, exports, A P Is) fragile, every new week shifts column positions.
The senior pattern: keep the data long-form (week, metric) in the DB and let the presentation layer (BI tool, frontend) pivot for display. Or pre-compute a materialized view with stable column names ( week_minus_1, week_minus_2,., week_minus_50 ) refreshed nightly.
Pivot is a presentation transform, not a data-modeling one, push it to the edge.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Deduplication.

Q: A table has duplicate rows on (email) and I need to keep one per email. How do I do it safely?-- think --

A: WITH dups AS (SELECT id, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY email ORDER BY created_at ASC) AS rn FROM customers) DELETE FROM customers WHERE id IN (SELECT id FROM dups WHERE rn > 1). ROW_NUMBER over the duplicate key assigns 1, 2, 3,.
within each group; deleting everything with rn > 1 keeps the oldest. The ORDER BY in the OVER clause controls which duplicate survives (oldest, newest, lowest id).

Cross-Q: What if the duplicates have slightly different data, same email but different phone or name ?-- think --

A: Now you have to decide which row to keep, or merge fields.
Common patterns: (1) keep the row with the most recent activity ( ORDER BY last_login_at DESC ); (2) keep the row with the most filled-in fields ( ORDER BY (CASE WHEN phone IS NULL THEN 0 ELSE 1 END) + (CASE WHEN name IS NULL THEN 0 ELSE 1 END) DESC ); (3) merge:
keep one row's ID but UPDATE its fields to take the non-null values across all duplicates before deleting the others.
The merge is a data-quality decision that needs PM or business input, not a pure technical choice. Document the rule.

Cross-Q²: I deduped, but the table will keep getting duplicates inserted because the app doesn't check. How do I prevent future duplicates?-- think --

A: Add a unique constraint: ALTER TABLE customers ADD CONSTRAINT uq_email UNIQUE (email). This will fail if duplicates still exist, that's why dedup comes first.
Once added, every INSERT or UPDATE that would create a duplicate gets a constraint violation, forcing the app to handle it (UPSERT, error message, "use existing account").
Without the DB-level constraint, app-level deduplication is racy, two concurrent inserts both pass the "does this email exist?" check before either commits. The DB is the only place that can serialize this safely. Unique constraint + ON CONFLICT is the durable answer.

-- pause --
Drill 11, Star versus snowflake schemas.

Q: What's the difference between star and snowflake schema, and when do you choose each?-- think --

A: Star, central fact table FKs to dimension tables; dimensions are flat (no further normalization). dim_product has product_id, name, category, sub_category all in one row. Joins are fast (one hop per dimension), denormalization is intentional. Snowflake, dimensions are normalized further.
dim_product to dim_category to dim_department. Saves storage if categories are highly repeated; adds more joins per query.

Cross-Q: Modern columnar databases compress dimension columns aggressively. Does snowflake still save storage?-- think --

A: Marginally. Columnar compression on category in dim_product already reduces "Electronics" repeated 10000 times to near-zero. The argument for snowflake's storage savings is dramatically weaker in modern warehouses (BigQuery, Snowflake, Redshift) than it was in 2005 row-store DBs.
What still differs: query speed (snowflake has more joins, slightly slower), maintainability (snowflake has clearer "what is a category versus a product"), and ETL complexity (snowflake needs more upstream pipelines).
Most modern data warehouses default to star or denormalized-wide-table designs for the query simplicity.

Cross-Q²: When is neither star nor snowflake, when is "one big table" (OBT) the right choice?-- think --

A: For event streams in modern warehouses (BigQuery, Snowflake), denormalize everything into a single wide table and forget joins. fact_sales already has the customer name, region, product name, category, store details, all duplicated per row.
Storage is cheap with columnar compression; query simplicity wins. The OBT pattern works because: (1) ETL pipelines handle the denormalization; (2) columnar compression makes the storage explosion modest; (3) BI tools struggle with multi-table joins for ad-hoc users.
The trade-off: dimensions changing (SCD) gets messier because every fact row has the dimension data embedded. For slowly-changing dimensions, snapshot the OBT periodically.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Fact table grain.

Q: What is "grain" in a fact table, and why is choosing it the first decision?-- think --

A: The grain is "what does one row represent?", one sale, one order line item, one daily snapshot of inventory per warehouse, one heartbeat per minute. The grain determines what the fact table can answer.
If grain is "one row per order," you can't answer "what was the most-purchased product?" because product is inside the order, you'd need to join to a finer grain.
Grain choice is irreversible; you can roll up (aggregate to coarser grain) but not drill down (split to finer grain) without re-ingesting source data.

Cross-Q: For a retail business, what grain do you choose for fact_sales ?-- think --

A: Almost always one row per line item (one row per (order, product) pair). It's the finest grain that has business meaning. From line items you can roll up to per-order, per-day, per-product, per-region, any analytical question.
If you start at per-order grain, you've lost product-level analytics forever. The exception: extremely high-volume systems where line items would explode (e-commerce with billions of items or day) might pre-aggregate to per-order-per-product-category as a starting grain, accepting the trade-off.

Cross-Q²: What's an additive, semi-additive, and non-additive fact?-- think --

A: Additive, measures you can sum across any dimension (sale_amount, quantity). Most useful, most common. Semi-additive, measures you can sum across some dimensions but not all (inventory_balance: sum across stores yes, sum across dates no, you'd be summing the same inventory multiple times).
Non-additive, measures you can never sum meaningfully (ratios, percentages, prices). Knowing this matters because BI tools default to SUM aggregations; users build dashboards that silently double-count semi-additive facts.
The defense: name semi-additive columns clearly ( inventory_snapshot not inventory ) and document the aggregation rules.

-- pause --
Drill 13, Queue tables and skip-locked.

Q: How do you implement a work queue table in sequel where multiple workers pull jobs without stepping on each other?-- think --

A: SELECT * FROM jobs WHERE status = 'pending' ORDER BY created_at LIMIT 1 FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED. The FOR UPDATE row-locks the matched row; SKIP LOCKED (Postgres 9.5+, sequel Server READPAST hint) tells concurrent SELECTs to skip rows already locked rather than block.
So worker 1 locks job 1; worker 2's SELECT. SKIP LOCKED skips it and locks job 2; both proceed in parallel. After processing, update status = 'done' and commit (releases the lock).

Cross-Q: What if a worker crashes mid-job? The row stays locked and no one else picks it up.-- think --

A: Two fixes. (1) Visibility timeout, instead of relying on the transaction lock, set processing_started_at = NOW() on pickup and commit. Workers compete via WHERE status = 'pending' OR (status = 'processing' AND processing_started_at < NOW() - INTERVAL '5 minutes').
A crashed worker's row becomes pickable again after 5 minutes. (2) Heartbeat, workers update processing_heartbeat = NOW() periodically; reclaim rows where heartbeat is stale. Pattern (1) is simpler; pattern (2) handles long-running jobs that legitimately take longer than the timeout.

Cross-Q²: Why not use a dedicated message broker (RabbitMQ, SQS, Azure Service Bus) instead?-- think --

A: Often you should.
sequel queue tables are great for: (a) keeping jobs in the same transaction as the data they touch, which removes the dual-write problem outright, the job and the row it describes commit or roll back together, and no outbox is needed;
(b) low operational overhead, with no extra service to deploy, monitor, and secure; (c) jobs that need rich sequel to schedule ("pick jobs whose dependency is done").
Message brokers win for: throughput beyond what one database's write path can absorb, fan-out to multiple independent consumers, built-in retry and dead-letter semantics, and decoupling producers from consumers who should not share a database.
The honest answer in an interview is that the decision is set by (a), if the job must be atomic with the data change, a queue table starts as the simpler correct design and a broker requires an outbox to match it.
Don't quote a throughput number you haven't measured on your own hardware; the number that matters is your write path's, not a benchmark's.

The syntax differs: Postgres Q L 9.5+ and MySQL 8.0+ have FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED.
sequel Server has no SKIP LOCKED keyword, the equivalent is the table hint combination WITH (UPDLOCK, READPAST, ROWLOCK):
UPDLOCK takes an update lock during the SELECT so the row cannot change before you write it, READPAST skips rows locked by other workers instead of blocking, and ROWLOCK asks for row granularity so a lock escalation doesn't make a worker skip a whole page of jobs.
Omit UPDLOCK and two workers can read the same row; omit READPAST and they queue behind each other instead of working in parallel.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Event sourcing in sequel.

Q: What is event sourcing and how do you implement it in sequel?-- think --

A: Store the events (state changes) as the source of truth, not the current state. events(event_id, aggregate_id, event_type, payload, occurred_at). Current state is derived by replaying events for an aggregate ( SELECT * FROM events WHERE aggregate_id = X ORDER BY occurred_at ).
Provides full audit (every change is an event), time travel (replay up to a point), and decoupling (downstream consumers subscribe to events).

Cross-Q: Replaying events for every query is slow. How do you avoid that?-- think --

A: Snapshots + projections. Periodically save the aggregate's state ( snapshots(aggregate_id, state_json, up_to_event_id) ) so replay starts from the snapshot, not from event 1.
Projections are materialized read models, a current_orders table that gets updated by an event handler subscribing to order events. Queries hit the projection (fast, denormalized for the use case), and the event log remains the audit trail.
The trade-off is eventual consistency: projections might be milliseconds behind the event log.

Cross-Q²: Event sourcing sounds powerful, why don't all systems use it?-- think --

A: Cost. (1) Schema evolution is hard, old events have old payloads; you have to version event types and write upcasters to translate v1 events to v2 shapes. (2) Storage grows unboundedly, events are never deleted; archiving old events is complex because replay needs all of them.
(3) Operational complexity, projections, replay tools, event versioning, snapshot strategies. (4) Mental load, every developer has to think in terms of events, not state.
Event sourcing is the right call for domains where audit is core (finance, healthcare, compliance-heavy systems) or where the event stream itself is a product (analytics platforms, real-time dashboards). For typical crud apps, it's massive overengineering.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Change Tracking versus change data capture.

Q: sequel Server has both Change Tracking and Change Data Capture. What's the difference?-- think --

A: Change Tracking (CT) records that a row changed and the key, but not what the change was. Lightweight, low overhead. Used for sync scenarios where the consumer queries the current row state after notification.
Change Data Capture records what changed, the before and after values for every UPDATE, plus INSERTs and DELETEs. Heavier (writes a duplicate of every change to a change data capture table) but provides full history.
CT is "row 42 changed, go look"; change data capture is "row 42 was {x:1} and is now {x:2}".

Cross-Q: When do you use which?-- think --

A: CT for sync to a single downstream system that can query current state, caches, search indexes, mobile sync (the client says "give me everything changed since my last sync token," the server responds with current row values).
change data capture when downstream consumers need the change history, replication, audit, event-driven architectures where the change data capture stream becomes the event source. change data capture is the foundation for Debezium-style change streams that feed Kafka.
If you're not sure, CT is cheaper and easier to enable.

Cross-Q²: How does change data capture compare to trigger-based audit tables?-- think --

A: change data capture is log-reader based, it reads the transaction log asynchronously to capture changes, so it doesn't add overhead to the writing transaction. Triggers run synchronously inside the transaction, adding latency proportional to the trigger logic.
change data capture is the better choice for high-throughput systems; triggers are simpler to set up and easier to understand (they're sequel you write yourself).
The other difference: change data capture handles bulk operations (TRUNCATE doesn't fire row triggers; change data capture captures them via the log).
Modern preference for streaming or replication: change data capture. For domain-specific audit columns with custom logic: triggers (or app-level interceptors, even cleaner).

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

Nth highest: DENSE_RANK = N for distinct values; LIMIT or OFFSET for raw rows.
Top-N per group: ROW_NUMBER partitioned + filter in C T E; LATERAL / CROSS APPLY as alternative.
Running total: SUM(x) OVER (PARTITION BY g ORDER BY t); one pass, no self-join.
Moving average: AVG(x) OVER (ORDER BY t ROWS BETWEEN N PRECEDING AND CURRENT) for fixed window.
Gaps and islands: subtract ROW_NUMBER * step from the date; constant value = consecutive run.
Median: PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY x); portable: ROW_NUMBER + COUNT trick.
Pivot: conditional aggregation ( SUM(CASE WHEN.) ); portable across dialects.
Pair finding: self-join with t1.id < t2.id to canonicalise; LEAST or GREATEST to dedupe.
Hierarchy: recursive C T E with array path for cycle detection.
Stored procs / triggers: hidden behaviour; document or move to app code unless integrity demands DB enforcement. On sequel Server every trigger is statement-level, write against inserted as a set.
Interval overlap: a.start < b.end AND b.start < a.end, half-open. Packing: running MAX(end) over preceding rows to island flag to cumulative SUM to GROUP BY.
Ties: TOP (n) WITH TIES (sequel Server) / FETCH FIRST n ROWS WITH TIES (Postgres Q L 13+). Only ROW_NUMBER promises a row count.
Recursion guards: sequel Server MAXRECURSION default 100; MySQL cte_max_recursion_depth default 1000; Postgres Q L none, add a depth column or the CYCLE clause (14+).
Plan shapes: window function = Sort + Segment + Sequence Project + Filter over the whole partition; APPLY = Nested Loops + Index Seek + Top, no sort, stops at n.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Top-3 orders per customer blowing up the app tier.

Problem: A backend service builds "customer summary" pages by issuing SELECT TOP 3. per customer in a loop. For 5000 customers per page, that's 5000 round trips. The endpoint is the slowest in the service and queue depth on the DB connection pool spikes whenever it's called.

Diagnosis: Senior runs pg_stat_statements and sees the same parametrised query executed 5000+ times per request, high calls, low mean_exec_time, and a total_exec_time near the top of the table, which is the signature of an N plus one rather than a slow query.
Application traces ( dotnet-trace collect --providers Microsoft-Diagnostics-DiagnosticSource ) confirm it's the foreach (var c in customers) { db.Orders.Where(o goes to o.CustomerId == c.Id).OrderByDescending(o goes to o.CreatedAt).Take(3).ToList(); } loop.
Each query is individually fast; the cost is 5000 round trips of network and command overhead that no amount of index tuning will remove.

Fix: Replace the loop with one query using ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY.):

From E F Core: there is no link translation for OVER.
The tracking issue dotnet or efcore#12747 "Support sequel window functions" is still open, and EF.Functions exposes no RowNumber or Partition methods, anything you may have seen that looks like EF.Functions.RowNumber(.) does not exist in E F Core.
Two documented ways to keep the single round trip:

FromSql takes a FormattableString, and the docs are explicit that this is not string interpolation in the dangerous sense: "the supplied value is wrapped in a DbParameter and the generated parameter name inserted where the {0} placeholder was specified.
This makes FromSql safe from sequel injection attacks." FromSqlRaw is the one that concatenates, and its documentation carries the corresponding warning, reach for it only when you are building the sequel text yourself, and then the sanitising is yours to do.

The alternative, if the shape is stable, is a database view containing the window function, mapped with ToView(.) and queried with link like any other entity.
That keeps the window function in the database, where E F Core cannot translate it, and keeps the call site in C sharp where the rest of the query composition lives.

Why it works: one statement means one round trip, and the window function lets the engine compute "top-3-per-group" in a single pass over the partition keys instead of 5000 separate plans, parses, and network waits. The DB does what it's optimised for; the app stops paying per-customer latency.

What to check afterwards: this trades N round trips for one sort over every order belonging to those 5000 customers.
If the customer list is small, a single customer's detail screen, the CROSS APPLY form against an index on (customer_id, created_at DESC) is the better plan, for the reasons in Reading the plan.
Fixing an N plus one by moving to a window function is right here because the driving set is large; it is not automatically right.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

DENSE_RANK. It compresses ties so the third unique value gets rank 3, regardless of how many shared earlier ranks. RANK would assign rank 4 or higher if the first two had ties, missing the third unique value.

PERCENTILE_CONT is portable across modern engines and concise but does an internal sort over the whole partition - expensive for huge groups.
The ROW_NUMBER trick is also a sort but lets you build it on top of pre-aggregated data and works on older engines (sequel Server before 2012, MySQL before 8).
For approximate medians on streams, t-digest or histograms beat both.

You can't nest aggregates without an intermediate aggregation. The inner SUM is evaluated, but MAX needs a separate row set to operate on. Wrap in a C T E: WITH per_customer AS (SELECT customer_id, SUM(total) AS s FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id) SELECT MAX(s) FROM per_customer.

The predicate != allows both (A, B) and (B, A) pairs and pairs the same row with every other row at scale. Use o1.order_id < o2.order_id to get unique pairs and reduce comparisons by half. For "find pairs", LEAST or GREATEST canonicalises after the join.

When the inner query needs different LIMIT per outer row, when you can use a covering index for the inner ORDER BY (so each lateral subquery is an index-only scan), or when the partition is huge and you don't want to sort the full set.
LATERAL fires once per outer row, so it pays off only when each call is fast.

a.starts_at < b.ends_at AND b.starts_at < a.ends_at. It's the negation of "one ends before the other starts", which is why one predicate covers partial overlap in both directions and full containment.
With closed intervals you need <= on both comparisons, and then two intervals that merely touch (one ends exactly where the next begins) count as overlapping, which is why validity periods should be stored half-open, [from, to).

More than one login per user per day. The identity "date advances by one, row number advances by one" breaks when two rows share a date: the second gets a higher row number, so its computed group value lands a day earlier and looks like a new island, splitting the streak.
Fix with DENSE_RANK() (same value for same date) or by de-duplicating to one row per user per day first. Same reasoning for the integer variant over a column with duplicates.

In Postgres Q L PERCENTILE_CONT is an ordered-set aggregate, so. WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY salary). GROUP BY department is valid. In T sequel it is an analytic function whose documented syntax requires OVER ( [ ] ); GROUP BY is not accepted.
The T sequel is PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY salary) OVER (PARTITION BY department), and because a window function doesn't collapse rows you need SELECT DISTINCT (or a C T E plus a join, which is cheaper) to get one row per department. MySQL has neither function.

Because LAG only sees the immediately preceding row. Order by starts_at and a long interval can be followed by a short one that it completely contains; the short one's ends_at is earlier, so LAG reports no overlap and the group is split even though the rows overlap.
MAX(ends_at) over all preceding rows in the partition remembers the furthest end reached so far, which is the actual boundary of the island.
Use an explicit ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND 1 PRECEDING frame, the default frame with ORDER BY includes the current row, so the running maximum would include the row's own ends_at, the new-island test could never fire, and everything would merge into one island.

T sequel triggers are statement-level, there is no FOR EACH ROW clause, and fire once per statement with inserted / deleted holding all affected rows.
E F Core batches the two inserts into one multi-row INSERT, so the trigger fires once, and a trigger written as SET count = count + 1 FROM inserted applies a single increment for the whole batch. The fix is set-based: aggregate inserted ( GROUP BY the key, COUNT(*) ) and add that.
Postgres Q L's FOR EACH ROW triggers don't have this problem; its FOR EACH STATEMENT ones do.