-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

DP is the technique for problems with two properties:
Optimal substructure, the optimal solution can be composed from optimal sub-solutions.
Overlapping subproblems, naive recursion would solve the same subproblem many times.

Recognizing DP is half the battle. Once recognized, the implementation is mechanical: identify state, identify transitions, identify base cases. The signature DP problems, Fibonacci, LCS, edit distance, coin change, knapsack, LIS, appear constantly in interviews.

For senior engineers in production: DP shows up in route planning (Bellman-Ford is DP), regex matching, query optimization (C T E-based DP in sequel), parsing (Earley algorithm), and bioinformatics. The pattern is widely useful even when not labeled "DP."

When NOT to use DP: when greedy works (and is simpler), when the problem isn't recursive, when N is small enough that brute force is fine. Recognize when the recursion tree has overlapping subproblems; otherwise it's just divide-and-conquer.

In the real world: DP rarely arrives labelled. A pricing service had a "best bundle for this basket" endpoint written as a straightforward recursive search over which discounts to apply, try each applicable promotion, recurse on the rest, keep the best.
It shipped against a catalogue with six promotions and was instant. Two years later a partner was onboarded with twenty-two, and the endpoint started timing out at the gateway for exactly the customers whose baskets were worth the most. Nobody had written anything slow; the code was the same code.
What changed was the input size crossing the point where 2ⁿ stops being small, and the search had been recomputing "best discount for this remaining basket" thousands of times over. Adding a dictionary keyed by the remaining-basket state was a nine-line diff.
The lesson worth carrying into an interview is that the moment you write a recursive method whose parameters repeat, you have written a DP whether or not you noticed, and the failure mode is not gradual, it is a cliff you fall off when a customer grows.

In the real world: the reverse mistake is more expensive to unwind.
A team building a route-optimisation feature reached for a DP because "route planning is DP" and built a dp[stop, visited Mask] table before checking the requirement, which was order the day's stops by earliest deadline and warn if any is unreachable. That is a sort plus a scan.
The bitmask DP was correct, was slower, capped the feature at 20 stops because of 2n, and took three sprints. It was replaced by forty lines.
Recognising DP is a skill; so is recognising that a problem which merely sounds combinatorial has a greedy or sorting answer, and interviewers probe the second one by asking "is there anything cheaper?" after you propose the table.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
DP fundamentals, overlapping subproblems + optimal substructure.

Overlapping subproblems is the key indicator. Naive recursive Fibonacci:

Trace Fib(5):

Fib(2) is computed 3 times; Fib(3) is computed 2 times. The total call count is exactly T(n) = 2, Fib(n+1) − 1, one call per node of that tree. T(5) = 2, 8 − 1 = 15, which is the number of nodes drawn.
T(50) = 2, Fib(51) − 1 = 40,730,022,147, so roughly 4 times 10¹⁰ calls, not the "about a billion" that gets repeated.
Being able to derive that closed form on the spot is worth more than remembering the magnitude: it is the same argument that shows the tree has exponentially many nodes but only n+1 distinct values in it.

With memoization:

Fib(50) now computes 51 distinct subproblems and makes about 100 calls in total, roughly half of which return straight from the cache. From O(2ⁿ) to O(n).

️ This code is wrong for n at least 47, and nothing tells you. Fib(46) = 1,836,311,903 fits in an int; Fib(47) = 2,971,215,073 does not ( int.MaxValue is 2,147,483,647 ).
C sharp arithmetic is unchecked by default, so the addition wraps to a negative number, the cache dutifully stores the wrong value, and every later result built on it is wrong too. Nothing throws. The DP is not what broke, the accumulator type is.
Fixes, in order of preference: use long (buys you to Fib(92) ), use System.Numerics.BigInteger if the problem really is unbounded, or, if the question is "how many ways", which is the common case, work modulo a prime, which is why competitive problems specify "answer modulo 10⁹+7".
You can also make the failure loud project-wide with true in the .csproj (the compiler default is unchecked; Microsoft Learn, Compiler Options, language feature rules), or locally with a checked { } block, which converts the silent wrap into an OverflowException.

In the real world: a logistics service had a DP that counted the number of valid delivery route permutations for a customer's constraints and displayed it on a planning screen. The table was int. For eighteen months every customer's count fitted comfortably.
Then a warehouse with a much larger fan-out was onboarded, the count overflowed, and the screen showed a negative number of routes.
The bug report was filed against the front end for "rendering a minus sign", and the first fix was a Math.Abs in the view model, which made the number positive, plausible, and still wrong.
The real defect was three layers down, in an int accumulator inside a counting DP, and the reason it survived review is that overflow in C sharp is silent by design.
Counting DPs are the single most common place a senior dot NET engineer meets unchecked arithmetic in anger; if the recurrence is a sum of counts, decide the accumulator type deliberately and write down why.

Optimal substructure, the optimal solution to the whole is built from optimal solutions to parts. For Fibonacci: Fib(n) = Fib(n-1) + Fib(n-2). For shortest path: shortest path from A to C = (shortest path from A to B) + (shortest path from B to C) for some intermediate B.

If you can write a recurrence relation expressing the answer in terms of smaller answers, you have optimal substructure.

The unifying model: a DP is a DAG, and both implementations are graph traversals.

Nearly everything else on this page falls out of one picture, and it is the picture that separates a candidate who has memorised recurrences from one who can derive them. Draw a node for every subproblem. Draw an edge from u to v when computing u needs v.
That graph must be acyclic, if u needs v and v needs u, neither is ever computable and no amount of caching rescues it. A DP is the evaluation of a value over the nodes of a DAG:

Optimal substructure, maps to, Each node's value is a function of its successors' values alone.
Overlapping subproblems, maps to, Some node has in-degree > 1.
Divide and conquer, maps to, Every node has in-degree 1, the DAG is a tree, so there is nothing to cache.
Memoization, maps to, Depth-first traversal from the answer node; the cache is what makes each node compute once.
Tabulation, maps to, Visiting nodes in a topological order, so successors are always finished first.
Time complexity, maps to, Nodes + edges = (number of states) times (choices per state).
Space complexity, maps to, Nodes you must keep alive at once.

The last row is the fastest way to get a DP's complexity right under pressure: count the states, count the choices per state, multiply. Knapsack has n times C states and 2 choices to O(n, C). Bitmask TSP has 2ⁿ times n states and n choices to O(2ⁿ, n²).
Edit distance has m times n states and 3 choices to O(m, n).
You never have to reason about the recursion tree again.

The DAG view also answers three questions the table view leaves mysterious.

Why does iteration order matter? Because tabulation is correct only if your loop order is a topological order of the dependency DAG.
The reverse-capacity loop in 1-D knapsack (pitfall 4) is not a trick to memorise: dp[c] after item i depends on dp[c − w[i]] before item i, and descending c is the topological order that respects it.
Iterating upward reads a node that has already been overwritten by the current item, which is precisely what "the item got counted twice" means.

Why does memoization sometimes beat tabulation despite identical Big-O? Because tabulation visits every node of the DAG whether or not it is reachable from the answer node, and DFS visits only the reachable subgraph.

What do I do when the dependency graph has a cycle? Add a dimension that makes it acyclic. Shortest path in a graph with cycles is not DP-able on state (node), d[v] = min over u of d[u] + w(u,v) is circular.
Bellman-Ford's real state is (node, edges used so far), and the edge count strictly increases along every transition, so that graph is a DAG; the familiar V−1 relaxation passes are its topological sweep. Every "I added a dimension and suddenly it worked" story in DP is this same move.

-- pause --
Memoization versus tabulation.

Two ways to implement DP:

Memoization (top-down), recursive solution + cache. Solve big problem; recurse into subproblems; cache as you go.

Tabulation (bottom-up), iterative; build table from base cases up.

Style, Top-down recursion, Bottom-up iteration.
Code, Often shorter, mirrors recurrence, More setup, but explicit.
Stack, Recursion depth, None.
Computes, Only needed subproblems, All subproblems.
Space optimization, Hard, Easy (rolling arrays).

When to pick which:
Memoization is easier to write from a recursive solution; great for sparse subproblem space.
Tabulation is preferred when stack depth matters or when space optimization (next) is desired.

For most interview answers: write memoization first (faster to derive); convert to tabulation if asked to optimize space.

The memo store is the real design decision. "Add memoization" sounds like one thing. In C sharp it is a choice between four stores with different lookup costs and different ways of going wrong, and the interviewer who asks "what would you cache it in?" is asking about exactly this.

T[] / T[,] + a sentinel, index arithmetic, one bounds check, one read, state is dense and indexed by small integers, the sentinel turns out to be a legal answer.
Dictionary, hash the key, index _buckets, walk a chain through _entries comparing keys, state is sparse, or the key is not a small integer, key allocation per probe; a rehash mid-run.
ConcurrentDictionary, the same work, with lock-free reads and fine-grained write locks, the memo is shared across requests or threads, GetOrAdd 's factory runs outside the lock and may run more than once.
IMemoryCache, a ConcurrentDictionary probe plus expiration bookkeeping, the memo must outlive a request and be evictable, it grows until the process dies unless SizeLimit is set and every entry declares a Size.

The first row is the one to reach for, and it is also the one with the trap that costs the most production hours.

️ The sentinel bug: default means "not computed", and default is also an answer. A bool[] memo defaults to false. In a yes or no DP, false is also a perfectly good answer, so the cache never records a negative result, and the memoisation silently does nothing on exactly the inputs that need it most.

csharp.
// WRONG, false means both "no" and "haven't looked yet".
bool[] memo = new bool[s.Length + 1];
bool CanSegment(int i).
{.
if (i == s.Length) return true;
if (memo[i]) return true; // only a positive result is ever a hit.
foreach (var w in words).
if (s.AsSpan(i).StartsWith(w) and and CanSegment(i + w.Length)).
return memo[i] = true;
return false; // never recorded to recomputed every time.
}.

On a string that can be segmented the code looks fine, because the first success short-circuits everything. On a string that cannot, it degenerates back to the exponential search it was supposed to replace. The three fixes, in order of preference:

A sentinel outside the value range. sbyte[] (or int[] ) filled with -1; 0 = no, 1 = yes. One array, one branch.
A parallel bool[] computed. Two arrays, no encoding cleverness, and it works for any value type. Two reads instead of one, and two cache lines instead of one.
bool?[] / int?[]. No boxing, Nullable is a struct, but the cell grows: Nullable is a bool plus an int aligned to 4 bytes, so a cell that was 4 bytes becomes 8 and the table doubles. Clearest to read, most expensive to store.

The same trap wears different hats. int[] zero-filled for a counting DP where 0 ways is a real answer. int[] zero-filled for a minimising DP where 0 cost is a real answer.
The habit worth forming: after you choose the memo array type, say out loud "and the value that means not yet computed is ___", if you cannot finish the sentence, you have the bug.

In the real world: a fraud-screening service decided whether a transaction narrative could be decomposed entirely into known merchant patterns, a word-break DP over a pattern dictionary, and memoised it into a bool[]. It passed review, passed its tests, and ran for a year.
Its p99 was terrible and nobody could explain it, because the p50 was fine and the slow requests were not correlated with narrative length in any obvious way.
They were correlated with the answer: every narrative that decomposed cleanly hit the memo and returned fast, and every narrative that did not fell through the un-memoised negative path and did the full exponential walk. The test corpus was, of course, mostly known-good narratives.
The fix was a change of element type, bool[] to sbyte[] with a -1 fill and 0 / 1 for the two answers, and the reusable lesson is sharper than "initialise your memo":
a cache whose miss marker collides with a real value does not fail, it degrades asymmetrically, and asymmetric degradation is invisible to any test suite built from happy-path examples.

Key design, when the state will not fit in array indices. A Dictionary memo is the right call for sparse state, and the way it is usually written throws away most of the benefit:

Interpolation runs before the lookup, so the allocation happens whether or not the key is present, and cache hits are, by construction, the common case. Three better keys, in ascending order of effort:

ValueTuple, Dictionary. No allocation; ValueTuple.GetHashCode funnels into HashCode.Combine, and the comparison is field-by-field. This is the default answer and it is almost always good enough.
A packed integer key, when every component has a known bound, (long)i << 40 | (long)j << 20 | (long)mask collapses the state to a single long. Hashing a long is trivial and equality is one comparison.
Write the packing and unpacking as a pair of small methods next to each other so the widths cannot drift apart.
A flat array with a sentinel, the packed key is an index. If the packed range is small enough to allocate, you have just turned the dictionary back into row one of this.

Two more Dictionary details that matter for a memo specifically.
It grows by rehashing every entry into a larger _entries array when it fills, so a memo that will hold a known number of states should be constructed with that capacity ( new Dictionary(expected States) ), otherwise a long DP run pays a sequence of full rehashes it did not need.
And Dictionary resolves collisions by chaining through an int next index in each entry, not by open addressing, so a bad key distribution lengthens chains rather than clustering probes.

️ CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrAddDefault looks made for memoisation and is unsafe for recursive memoisation. The A P I, added in dot NET 6, hands back ref TValue to the slot and tells you via out bool exists whether it was already there, so a get-or-insert costs one hash instead of two.
Exactly the shape a memo wants.
But the documented remark is:
"Items should not be added to or removed from the Dictionary while the ref TValue is in use." A recursive memo does precisely that, the computation you run to fill the slot recurses and inserts other keys, any one of which can trigger a resize that allocates a new _entries array.
Your ref then points into the old, orphaned array, and the write lands nowhere:

csharp.
// WRONG, Solve() inserts into memo, which may resize and invalidate slot.
ref int slot = ref CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrAddDefault(memo, key, out bool exists);
if (!exists) slot = Solve(key); // the assignment can be written to a dead array.

There is no exception and no corruption you can see; the entry simply stays 0 and gets recomputed forever, which is the sentinel bug again by another route.
The honest conclusion is worth saying in an interview: for recursive memoisation the ref A P Is buy nothing safe, because the compute step is the thing that mutates the dictionary.
They are excellent for the tabulation-shaped fill, where you compute the value first and only then take the ref, and for read-modify-write over a dictionary of struct values where nothing is inserted in between.

Thread safety, if the memo outlives one call. A pure DP function is a perfect candidate for a process-wide cache, and a plain Dictionary in a singleton is not safe to share.
Concurrent writes can leave the bucket chains inconsistent, and the symptom is not an exception, it is a thread that never returns from a lookup.
If you share the memo, use ConcurrentDictionary, and know one thing about GetOrAdd: the docs state that "the value Factory delegate is called outside the locks" and that "if you call GetOrAdd simultaneously on different threads, value Factory may be called multiple times,
but only one key or value pair will be added." For a pure DP that is harmless, two threads compute the same number and one result is discarded.
It stops being harmless the moment the factory does anything else: increments a counter, writes a log line, charges something.

In the real world: a pricing service memoised its bundle-optimisation DP into a static readonly Dictionary on a singleton, because "the answer only depends on the inputs, so it's safe to share." Under single-request load tests it was a large win.
In production, two or three pods per week would go to 100% C P U on one core and stop serving, with no exception in the logs and a perfectly healthy-looking heap dump, the classic signature of two threads having written to a Dictionary concurrently and left a bucket chain pointing at itself,
so a subsequent read walks it forever.
Restarting the pod "fixed" it, which is why it took four months to escalate.
The change was one word, Dictionary to ConcurrentDictionary, and the review conversation that followed was the valuable part: GetOrAdd may run the factory more than once for the same key, which was fine here and would not have been fine if the factory had also been emitting a metric per computation.
The transferable point is that "pure function, therefore thread-safe" reasons about the function and says nothing about the container you cached it in.

In the real world: the same service warmed that cache overnight with a BackgroundService that precomputed each tenant's table in parallel:

csharp.
for (int t = 0; t < tenants.Count; t++).
tasks.Add(Task.Run(() goes to Warm(tenants[t]))); // captures t, not its value.
await Task.WhenAll(tasks);

A for loop declares one variable and every lambda closes over that same variable, so by the time the tasks ran, t was tenants.Count.
The job logged a handful of ArgumentOutOfRangeException s each night and was triaged for months as "flaky data", because it was doing work, just all of it for whichever tenants happened to win the race, and none for the rest.
The observable symptom was not the exception; it was that the first request of the morning for most tenants was slow, which everyone had rationalised as jit warm-up.
C sharp 5 changed the foreach iteration variable to be per-iteration precisely to kill this class of bug, and the language design notes are explicit that the for loop variable was deliberately not changed, because a for loop's variable is genuinely one variable that the loop mutates.
The one-line fix is int index = t; inside the body, or foreach (var tenant in tenants), which has been safe since C sharp 5.
Worth carrying: "it works in a foreach " is not evidence that it works in a for, and a background job is the worst place to have this bug because nobody is watching the response.

Recursion depth is a hosting concern, not a style preference. The page's own pitfall list and drills quote thresholds for when memoised recursion overflows the stack; treat those as folklore.
The real quantities are: the thread's stack is a fixed reservation made when the thread is created, and each frame consumes as much of it as that method's locals, spills and saved registers need, so the safe depth depends on the method, not on a number you can memorise.
What you can rely on is the failure mode: a StackOverflowException cannot be caught and terminates the process, so a deep DP is an availability bug rather than a request failure.

Two defences, both cheap:

Microsoft Learn describes EnsureSufficientExecutionStack as ensuring "that the remaining stack space is large enough to execute the average dot NET function" against "an artificially limited stack that preserves enough space for an exception to be raised." It is what compiler-services code,
Roslyn's expression walkers among them, uses for exactly this problem.
The structural fix is still the same one: if the recursion depth is a function of user-supplied data, convert to tabulation or to an explicit Stack, and cap the input.

In the real world: a rules engine evaluated customer-authored expression trees with a memoised recursive walk, and the memo made it fast enough that nobody looked at it again.
A customer's rule generator emitted a deeply right-nested boolean chain, thousands of levels, and the evaluator pods began dying mid-request: no exception, no stack trace, container exit code and a "Stack overflow." line on stdout.
The first attempt was a try / catch around the walk, which does nothing, because StackOverflowException is not deliverable to managed code. The second was to run the evaluation on a Thread created with a larger maxStackSize, which moved the cliff by a constant and left it in place.
What actually held was two changes: a RuntimeHelpers.TryEnsureSufficientExecutionStack() check at the top of the recursive method that returned a 422 with the offending rule id, and a documented nesting limit enforced at rule-save time.
The interviewable framing is that memoisation bounds the number of subproblems and does nothing at all about the depth of the chain to reach them, those are different resources and only one of them is on the heap.

How to settle memoisation versus tabulation on your own workload. Both are the same asymptotics, so the question is constants, and the honest answer is a sweep rather than a remembered multiplier. The shape:

Read it in this order. (1) At Density = 1.0, tabulation should win, and if it does not, your memo array is doing something tabulation is not, usually skipping bounds checks or fitting in cache.
(2) At low Density, the gap should reverse, because tabulation is paying for states nobody reaches; if it does not reverse, your state space is not as sparse as you believed and you should drop the dictionary.
(3) Allocated is the column that decides the production question, the dictionary memo allocates per distinct state, the array memo allocates once, and tabulation allocates once; a per-request DP with a large Allocated is a garbage collector problem regardless of which one has the better Mean.

-- pause --
State design.

The hardest part of DP is figuring out what the state is. State = the parameters that uniquely identify a subproblem.

Examples:

Fibonacci, i (index), 1D: dp[i].
Climb stairs (1 or 2 steps at a time), i, 1D.
House robber (no two adjacent), i, 1D.
Coin change (min coins for amount), amount, 1D.
Knapsack 0 or 1, (i, capacity), 2D: dp[i, c].
Edit distance, (i, j) (positions in two strings), 2D.
LCS, (i, j), 2D.
Matrix chain mult, (i, j) (range), 2D.
LIS, i, 1D.
Bitmask TSP, (i, mask) (current city + visited set), 2D, bitmask.

Process for designing state:
Define what "the answer for the smallest subproblem" is.
Identify what parameters change between subproblems.
Write the recurrence.
Identify base cases.

For interview problems, ~80% of DP problems fit one of: 1D index, 2D (i, j), knapsack-style (item, capacity), bitmask.

The test that tells you the state is right: sufficiency. "Parameters that uniquely identify a subproblem" is circular, the subproblem is whatever the parameters say it is. The non-circular version is a property of the problem, and it is the single most useful thing on this page:

A state is sufficient when any two ways of arriving at it have interchangeable futures. If two different prefixes both land on state s, and the optimal continuation from s is not the same for both, then s is not a state, it is a summary that threw away something the future needed.

This is the Markov property wearing an algorithms hat, and it is exactly the property that makes a cache legal.
Memoisation is the claim "I have seen this before, and the answer is the same as last time." If two arrivals at s have different best futures, that claim is a lie and the cache will happily serve you the wrong one. Nothing throws; the answer is just wrong for some inputs.

The test is mechanical. Take your proposed state, construct two distinct prefixes that reach it, and ask whether a single number can be the answer for both:

Maximum profit from at most K stock trades. Proposed state: (day). Two prefixes reach day 5, one having used all K trades, one having used none. The best future is obviously different. (day) is insufficient. Add the trade count: (day, trades Used).
Now two prefixes reaching (day 5, 2 trades used) still differ, one is holding a share and one is not, and only one of them can sell tomorrow. Add it: (day, trades Used, holding). Now the futures genuinely are interchangeable, and the recurrence writes itself.

Each round of that test adds exactly one dimension, and each dimension you add is a thing the future cares about that you had been discarding. That is the whole of state design.
A useful phrasing to carry into an interview, because it converts a creative act into a procedure: "if I handed this subproblem to a colleague on an index card, what would have to be written on the card for them to finish it without seeing the rest of the input?" Everything on the card is the state.
Anything you find yourself wanting to shout across the room is a dimension you have missed.

In the real world: a subscription platform priced add-on bundles with a DP over (addOnIndex), for each add-on in a fixed order, take it or leave it, keep the cheapest total. It was correct for two years.
Then a contract type was introduced with an annual discount cap: once a customer's cumulative discount crossed a threshold, further discounts stopped applying. The DP was not changed, because on the face of it nothing about the choices had changed.
But the state was now insufficient: two different sets of earlier add-ons could reach the same addOnIndex with different accumulated discount, and the best future differed between them.
The output was still a plausible number, always within a few percent, never negative, never null, so no test caught it and no alert fired. Finance found it in a quarterly reconciliation, eleven months later.
The fix was (addOnIndex, discountUsedInBuckets), which multiplied the state space by the bucket count and ran fine.
The lesson that generalises past pricing: a new business rule that mentions "so far", "cumulative", "up to", "at most", or "remaining" is a new state dimension, and if you add the rule without adding the dimension you get a DP that is wrong quietly rather than loudly.

The move that unlocks the hard problems: swap the state and the value. When the natural index is huge but the natural answer is small, index by the answer and store the constraint. Whole families of "how did anyone think of that?" algorithms are this one substitution.

LIS. Natural DP: dp[i] = length of the longest increasing subsequence ending at i, transition scans all j < i, O(n²). Now invert, index by length and store the tail: f[len] = the smallest value that can end an increasing subsequence of length len.
f is automatically sorted (a longer subsequence cannot have a smaller tail), so the transition is a binary search rather than a scan, and O(n²) becomes O(n log n). The tails array in the code is not a trick bolted onto a sort; it is the DP table of the inverted state.
That is the answer to "explain why the O(n log n) LIS works," and it is a much better answer than describing the mechanics.
Knapsack. Natural DP: dp[i, c] = max value achievable with the first i items in capacity c, giving O(n, C). Invert: g[i, v] = the minimum weight needed to achieve value exactly v with the first i items, giving O(n, ΣV) where ΣV is the total value of all items.
Read the answer off as the largest v whose g[n, v] at most C. Same problem, same optimum, and you get to pick whichever of C and ΣV is smaller, which matters enormously when capacity is a currency amount in minor units and values are small integers, or the reverse.
This inversion is also the scaffolding for the standard fully-polynomial approximation scheme for knapsack: round the values down to a coarser grid, which shrinks ΣV by a controllable factor, and the value-indexed DP inherits the bound.

The trigger to look for: one of your dimensions ranges over something enormous, and the quantity you are storing ranges over something small. Trade them.

Shrinking a state you already have. Four moves, roughly in order of how often they apply:

Drop a dimension that is a function of the others. If your transitions always advance i + j by exactly one, then j = step − i and dp[step, i] carries the same information as dp[i, j] in one fewer dimension, sometimes turning a 3-D table into a 2-D one.
Canonicalise symmetric states. If (a, b) and (b, a) are the same subproblem, sort the pair before it becomes a key. Half the table disappears, and so does a class of duplicate-work bug.
Quantise a continuous dimension, money into minor units, time into slot indices. Cheap and usually correct, but be honest about what happened: once you have bucketed, you are solving a discretised problem, and the optimum of the discretised problem is not necessarily the optimum of the original.
Say so out loud; interviewers notice when a candidate quietly turns an exact algorithm into an approximation.
Drop history you are keeping "just in case." Every dimension you cannot justify with the sufficiency test is multiplying the table for nothing.

Do the memory arithmetic before you write the code, not after. The DAG view gives it to you in one line: nodes are states, so the bill is (number of states) times sizeof(cell).
This is the calculation that decides whether a DP is a solution or a story about how you ran out of RAM, and it takes ten seconds:

Edit distance, 10k times 10k strings, 10⁸, int, 4 B, ~400 megabytes, allocatable but on the LOH, and unnecessary (see rolling arrays).
Knapsack, 200 items, capacity in pence up to £1,000, 200 times 10⁵ = 2 times 10⁷, int, 4 B, ~80 megabytes per request.
Bitmask TSP, 20 cities, 2²⁰ times 20 approximately 2.1 time 10⁷, double, 8 B, ~168 megabytes.
Bitmask TSP, 25 cities, 2²⁵ times 25 approximately 8.4 times 10⁸, double, 8 B, ~6.7 gigabytes, the feature does not exist.

The last two rows are why the "bitmask DP works up to about 20, 25" rule of thumb exists, and stating the arithmetic rather than the rule of thumb is the difference between having memorised a limit and understanding one.

-- pause --
Fibonacci.

Already shown. O(n) time, O(n) space (memo) or O(1) space (rolling).

-- pause --
Climbing stairs.

n steps, take 1 or 2 at a time. How many ways to reach the top?

State: i (current step). Transition: dp[i] = dp[i-1] + dp[i-2] (came from i-1 or i-2). Base: dp[0] = 1, dp[1] = 1.

This is Fibonacci with different base. Same shape.

-- pause --
House robber.

Houses in a row; each has loot; can't rob two adjacent. Max loot?

State: i. Transition: dp[i] = max(dp[i-1], dp[i-2] + loot[i]) (skip house i, or rob house i and add to dp[i-2]). Base: dp[0] = loot[0], dp[1] = max(loot[0], loot[1]).

-- pause --
Coin change, minimum coins for amount.

Given coins and an amount; find minimum coins to make the amount (or -1 if impossible).

State: amount. Transition: dp[a] = min(dp[a - c] + 1 for c in coins if a - c >= 0). Base: dp[0] = 0.

O(amount times coins.Length) time, O(amount) space.

-- pause --
Longest Common Subsequence (LCS).

Given two strings; find length of longest sequence that appears in both (as a subsequence, not necessarily contiguous).

State: (i, j) = LCS of s1[0.i] and s2[0.j].

Transition:
If s1[i-1] == s2[j-1]: dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1] + 1.
Else: dp[i, j] = max(dp[i-1, j], dp[i, j-1]).

Base: dp[0, ] = dp[, 0] = 0.

O(m times n) time, O(m times n) space (reducible to O(min(m, n)) with rolling).

Use cases: diff tools, version control, plagiarism detection, DNA alignment.

Note the phrasing of the space bound: rolling arrays get you O(min(m, n)) for the length. Recovering the actual subsequence from two rows is not possible by backtracking, because the rows you would backtrack through no longer exist.
That is not the end of the story, see Space optimization for the divide-and-conquer trick that gets both, but it is the reason the naive answer to "space-optimise it" costs you the diff.

-- pause --
Edit distance (Levenshtein).

Minimum operations (insert, delete, substitute) to transform s1 to s2.

State: (i, j). Transition:
If s1[i-1] == s2[j-1]: dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1].
Else: dp[i, j] = 1 + min(dp[i-1, j], dp[i, j-1], dp[i-1, j-1]) (delete, insert, substitute).

Base: dp[i, 0] = i, dp[0, j] = j.

Use cases: spell-check, fuzzy search, autocorrect, biological sequence alignment.

-- pause --
Knapsack (0 or 1).

n items, each with weight and value; pick subset maximizing value subject to weight at most capacity.

State: (i, c) = max value using first i items with capacity c.

Transition:
Skip item i: dp[i, c] = dp[i-1, c].
Take item i (if fits): dp[i, c] = max(dp[i-1, c], dp[i-1, c - w[i]] + v[i]).

O(n times capacity) time. Note: this is pseudo-polynomial, capacity is a value, not the input size; for huge capacity, this isn't truly polynomial.

Variants:
Unbounded knapsack, unlimited copies. Coin change is a knapsack variant.
Fractional knapsack, items can be split. Greedy wins (sort by value or weight); not DP.

-- pause --
Longest Increasing Subsequence (LIS).

Given an array, find the longest strictly increasing subsequence.

O(n²) DP: dp[i] = length of LIS ending at index i. Transition: dp[i] = 1 + max(dp[j] for j < i if arr[j] < arr[i]).

O(n log n) trick: maintain a "tails" array where tails[i] is the smallest tail of any increasing subsequence of length i + 1. Use binary search to insert.

This is one of the few DP problems where binary search hides a DP underneath.

-- pause --
Word break.

Given a string and a dictionary; can the string be segmented into dictionary words?

State: dp[i] = true if s[0.i] can be segmented. Transition: dp[i] = OR over j in [0, i) of (dp[j] AND s[j.i] in dict).

-- pause --
Matrix chain multiplication.

Given dimensions p[0.n], find min scalar multiplications to compute the product M₁ times M₂ times. times Mₙ.

State: (i, j) = min ops to multiply matrices i through j.

Transition: dp[i, j] = min over k in [i, j) of (dp[i, k] + dp[k+1, j] + p[i-1] times p[k] times p[j]).

Classic interval DP.

-- pause --
DP versus greedy versus divide-and-conquer.

DP, Yes, Yes.
Greedy, Yes, No (each choice is local).
Divide and conquer, Yes, No (subproblems are independent).

Greedy makes the locally-optimal choice and never looks back. Examples: Dijkstra, Huffman coding, fractional knapsack, activity selection. Greedy works when local choices compose to global optimum (provable via exchange arguments).

When greedy fails, two counterexamples worth having memorised, because "greedy might not be optimal" is not an answer and a concrete failing input is:

0 or 1 knapsack, greedy by value or weight ratio: weights = [10, 20, 30], values = [60, 100, 120], capacity = 50. Ratios are 6, 5, 4, so greedy takes item 0 (weight 10, value 60) and item 1 (weight 20, value 100), leaving 20 units of capacity that item 2 cannot fit into, total 160.
The optimum takes items 1 and 2 for exactly 50 units and 220. Greedy's mistake is structural, not unlucky: filling capacity with the best rate leaves a remainder that no remaining item can use, and only the fractional variant lets you sell that remainder.
Coin change, greedy by largest coin: denominations [1, 3, 4], amount 6. Greedy takes 4, then 1 + 1, 3 coins. The optimum is 3 + 3, 2 coins.

**When greedy coin change is safe, and how you would know. A denomination set for which greedy is always optimal is called canonical**, and canonicity is a property of the specific set, not of the problem.
It is not a matroid property, coin systems are not matroids, and the matroid greedy theorem does not apply to them. What is true is that the question is decidable and cheap:

Kozen and Zaks (1994) proved that if a system 1 = c₁ < c₂ <. < c_m is not canonical, the smallest counterexample x lies strictly between c₃ + 1 and c_m + c_{m−1}, and that these bounds are tight. So you can settle it exhaustively: run both greedy and the DP over that finite window and compare.
For a real currency this is a loop of a few hundred iterations you can put in a unit test.
Pearson (2005) gave an O(m³) algorithm that decides canonicity directly, by showing that the smallest counterexample must be one of O(m²) candidate values.

Sterling [1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200] and US [1, 5, 10, 25] are canonical, which is why the intuition feels universal. Bespoke ladders are frequently not. [1, 20, 50] fails at 60: greedy pays 50 + ten 1 second = 11, the optimum is three 20 seconds = 3.
Note where 60 sits, inside (c₃ + 1, c_m + c_{m−1}) = (51, 70), exactly as the theorem predicts.

In the real world: a loyalty programme let customers redeem points for fixed-denomination vouchers, and the redemption service picked vouchers greedily, largest first, because "that's how change works." The ladder was not a currency;
it had been chosen by the marketing team and revised twice, and one revision left it non-canonical.
Customers redeeming certain amounts received more, smaller vouchers than necessary. Nothing was wrong in an accounting sense, the totals reconciled to the penny, so it survived audit; it surfaced as support tickets about "why did I get eleven vouchers" and was initially triaged as a U X complaint.
The fix was not to rewrite the greedy as a DP, which would have been the reflex answer. It was to add a startup assertion: given the configured ladder, brute-force every amount in the Kozen, Zaks window and fail fast if greedy ever loses to the DP.
Greedy stayed, because for the (repaired) ladder it is provably right and it is one line.
The reusable idea is that "prove the greedy choice property" sounds like a whiteboard exercise and is often a small, permanent, automated check, and that a denomination table owned by a non-engineering team is a configuration input, so it deserves a validation rule like any other.

Divide and conquer splits, solves recursively, combines, but subproblems don't overlap. Mergesort, binary search, FFT.

Recognition: if your recursion tree shows duplicate subproblems, it's DP. If subproblems are independent, it's divide-and-conquer.

-- pause --
Space optimization.

Many DP solutions can be space-optimized via rolling arrays.

Fibonacci: dp[i] only depends on dp[i-1] and dp[i-2]. Two variables suffice.

LCS: dp[i, j] depends on dp[i-1, j-1], dp[i-1, j], dp[i, j-1]. Two rows suffice (current + previous).

O(m times n) time, O(n) space.

Two things in that loop are worth naming rather than copying.
(prev, curr) = (curr, prev) swaps the references, it is a tuple deconstruction of two locals, not an array copy, so the swap is free;
writing prev = curr and then curr = new int[n + 1] instead would allocate a row per iteration of i and is the most common way this optimisation gets un-optimised during a refactor.
And the Array.Clear(curr) is redundant here, every cell curr[1.n] is unconditionally written on the next pass and curr[0] is always 0, but it is load-bearing in any rolling DP where a cell is written only under a condition,
because the stale value left over from row i − 2 is a perfectly plausible-looking number.
Keep the clear unless you have checked that every cell is written; the cost is one memset per row and the bug it prevents is silent.

For 0 or 1 knapsack: even better, iterate capacity in reverse and use one row.

O(n times capacity) time, O(capacity) space.

You do not actually have to choose between linear space and reconstruction. The standard claim, and this page makes it twice, is that rolling arrays give you the value and cost you the path. That is true of the naive rolling array and false of the problem. Hirschberg's algorithm (D. S.
Hirschberg, A linear space algorithm for computing maximal common subsequences, CACM 18(6), 1975) recovers the full alignment in O(min(m, n)) space and O(m, n) time, by combining the rolling array with divide and conquer:

Split s1 at its midpoint i = m or 2.
Run the forward rolling DP over rows 0.i, keeping only the final row: this gives, for every j, the best score for s1[0.i] against s2[0.j].
Run the same DP backwards over rows m.i on the reversed strings, keeping only its final row: the best score for s1[i.m] against s2[j.n].
Add the two rows elementwise and take the argmax. That j* is the column the optimal alignment crosses at row i, a single point on the path, found in linear space.
Recurse on the two quadrants (0.i, 0.j*) and (i.m, j*.n).

The recursion halves the problem each time and the work at each level is proportional to the sub-rectangle, so the total is a geometric series summing to roughly twice the single-pass cost, quadratic time still, with a small constant multiplier, in linear space.
That trade (constant-factor time for an order-of-magnitude in space) is why it is the standard technique in sequence alignment, and a variant of the same idea appears in Myers' diff algorithm (E. W.
Myers, An O(ND) Difference Algorithm and Its Variations, Algorithmica 1(2), 1986), which is what git diff is built on.

You will rarely implement it under interview time pressure.
Knowing it exists is what matters, because "you lose reconstruction" is a claim a good interviewer will push on, and the correct answer is: you lose it if you just keep two rows; if you need both, the technique is Hirschberg's, and it costs you a constant factor of time rather than the space.

In the real world: a document-comparison service ran edit distance over full contract texts and OOM-killed its pods on the largest ones, a 60,000-character pair is a 3.6 times 10⁹-cell table, which is not a memory-tuning problem, it is an arithmetic one.
The team space-optimised to two rows overnight and the crashes stopped. Three weeks later the product owner asked why the "show me the changes" view had quietly become a similarity percentage.
Nobody had connected the two: the rolling arrays had thrown away the table the renderer backtracked through, and the renderer had been changed to display the only thing still available.
The eventual design kept both paths, the full table a size threshold where holding it is affordable, and a linear-space Hirschberg pass it, but the interesting failure was organisational:
a space optimisation silently deleted a feature, because the feature depended on an intermediate data structure nobody had written down as an interface.

Where the space actually goes in dot NET, and what to do about it. The asymptotics are only half the story once the DP runs per request. Three mechanisms decide whether an O(n) table is free or expensive:

85,000 bytes is a cliff, not a slope. An object at or 85,000 bytes is allocated on the large object heap. Divide through, remembering the array's own header: an int[] crosses the line a little over 21,000 elements, a double[] a little over 10,600.
LOH objects are collected only during a generation 2 collection, and the garbage collector sweeps rather than compacts them by default.
Microsoft's own guidance on the page is explicit:
"we recommend that you allocate a pool of large objects that you reuse instead of allocating temporary ones." A per-request DP table just over the line is the textbook way to turn a healthy service into one whose garbage collector trigger reason is AllocLarge.
ArrayPool is the pool that guidance is asking for, and it has two documented behaviours that break DP code written against new int[] habits.
Rent(minimum Length) "retrieves a buffer that is at least the requested length", so dp.Length is no longer your table width and every loop bound must come from your own n, not from the array.
And "the array returned by this method may not be zero-initialized", so a DP that relies on default base cases reads whatever the previous tenant left behind.

Return(dp, clear Array: true) clears on the way out instead of on the way in; pick one end and be consistent, because doing neither is the bug and doing both is waste.
Clearing on return is the right default when the buffer held anything sensitive, since it stops the data being visible to the next renter.
Small rows can skip the heap entirely.
Span row = stackalloc int[n] allocates on the stack, costs no garbage collector anything, and is bounded by the stack you do not have much of, so it needs a size guard ( n <= 128 or similar, falling back to the pool) and it must not be inside a loop,
because stackalloc inside a loop keeps consuming stack until the method returns, not until the iteration ends.

One layout note that costs nothing to get right:
C sharp multidimensional arrays are laid out in row-major order, ECMA-335 requires that "the elements associated with the rightmost array dimension shall be laid out contiguously from lowest to highest index", so in dp[i, j] the j loop must be the inner one for the reads to be sequential.
Both 2-D samples on this page already do that. If a DP inner loop is genuinely hot, the next step is to flatten to a single int[] and index i * width + j yourself, which also lets you take a Span over one row and hand it to code that only needs the row.

In the real world: a data-import A P I deduplicated incoming customer records with an edit-distance pass and allocated new int[a.Length + 1, b.Length + 1] per comparison. Field lengths were modest, but the tables were routinely a few hundred kilobytes, so every one of them landed on the LOH.
Under normal load nothing looked wrong.
During the monthly bulk import the service spent most of its wall-clock time in generation 2 collections;
a PerfView trace made it unambiguous, because every garbage collector in the window had trigger reason AllocLarge and an LOH survival rate near zero, the pure signature of large, short-lived allocations.
The first fix was rolling two rows, which dropped the tables under the 85,000-byte line and solved it.
The team then went further and rented the rows from ArrayPool.Shared, and that is where the second, worse bug arrived: Rent returns a dirty buffer, the base-case row was assumed to be zeroed, and the dedupe started producing distances that were too small, so unrelated records were merged.
It shipped, because the outputs were still numbers in the right range.
The two lessons stack: allocation size is a behavioural property in dot NET, not just a resource cost; and moving from new to a pool changes the initialisation contract, which is exactly the kind of assumption a DP's base cases are made of.

In the real world: a shift-scheduling DP stored more than a score per cell, a double score, the index of the choice that produced it, and a long bitmask of constraints satisfied, so 24 bytes once padded, in a struct Cell held in a List.
The inner loop did the obvious thing, var cell = dp[i]; cell.Score = best; dp[i] = cell;, because dp[i].Score = best does not compile against a List indexer. That is two full 24-byte copies per write, in the hottest loop in the service.
The recursive helper made it worse by taking Cell by value on every call.
The engineer who picked it up added in to the parameter and expected an improvement, and got none, because Cell was not declared readonly struct, and when you invoke a non-readonly instance member (a method,
or a property getter not marked readonly ) through an in parameter of a non-readonly struct, the compiler must insert a defensive copy so the callee cannot mutate the caller's value.
The properties on Cell were exactly that, so the "optimisation" reintroduced the copy it was meant to remove and added an indirection on top.
Three changes fixed it properly: mark the type readonly struct so in stops copying; move the table from List to Cell[] and write through ref Cell slot = ref dp[i];, which mutates in place;
and where a List genuinely had to stay, use CollectionsMarshal.AsSpan(list) to get a Span over the backing store so span[i].Value = best compiles and mutates.
The senior point is that in is not free and struct is not automatically fast, both are contracts with the copy rules, and reading them backwards makes hot loops slower while looking like tuning.

-- pause --
Bitmask DP.

When state includes a subset of N items, encode the subset as a bitmask (N at most 20-25 typical).

Example: TSP (Traveling Salesman), visit all cities exactly once, return to start, minimize total distance.

State: (mask, current) where mask is the bitmask of visited cities, current is the current city.

O(N² times 2N) time, O(N times 2N) space.

️ Why this returns double and not int. An earlier form of this sample ended return (int)answer;, and answer can legitimately still be double.PositiveInfinity, when n == 1 the final loop never executes, and in a graph with unreachable pairs no complete tour exists.
Casting an infinity to int in C sharp is a narrowing conversion whose behaviour changed under you: through dot NET 8 on x86 or x64 an out-of-range double to int produced int.MinValue, and since dot NET 9 the conversion saturates, so the same code now yields int.MaxValue (and NaN yields 0 ).
Either way it is silent, and both answers are wrong in opposite directions, a "no tour exists" case that used to report a hugely negative cost now reports a hugely positive one, so an upgrade can flip a bug from "route looks free" to "route looks impossible" without a single line changing.
The rule: an infinity sentinel must be tested, never cast. Return the double, or check double.IsPositiveInfinity(answer) and return a nullable / throw.
If you use int.MaxValue as the sentinel instead, the mirror-image trap is adding to it, int.MaxValue + 1 wraps to int.MinValue under C sharp's default unchecked arithmetic, which is why the coin-change sample guards with if (sub != int.MaxValue) before adding.

What actually caps N, and it is memory, not clock speed. Count states and multiply, exactly as the DAG model says. dp is 2N times N cells:

16, 1.05 times 10⁶, ~8 megabytes, ~4 megabytes.
20, 2.10 times 10⁷, ~168 megabytes, ~84 megabytes.
22, 9.23 times 10⁷, ~738 megabytes, ~369 megabytes.
25, 8.39 times 10⁸, ~6.7 gigabytes, ~3.4 gigabytes.

That is the whole of the "N at most 20, 25" rule of thumb, and it is worth deriving rather than quoting, because it also tells you the two levers.
Each extra city multiplies the table by 2 times (N plus one)/N, so halving the cell, costs in integer minor units rather than double, buys back roughly one city and nothing buys five.
Note also that Array.MaxLength ( 0x7FFFFFC7 elements) is documented as applying to single-dimension, zero-bound arrays only, so flattening a large table to int[] introduces an element-count ceiling that int[,] does not have; at these sizes the byte count is the binding constraint either way.

Exactly half of the table is structurally dead, dp[mask, u] is only meaningful when bit u is set in mask, and summed over all masks the set bits are half the (mask, u) pairs. There is no cheap dense packing that removes it, which is worth saying out loud rather than being caught out by.

The bit operations, with the BCL members that exist. System.Numerics.BitOperations (dot NET Core 3.0 and later) maps directly onto hardware instructions where the platform has them:

Two idioms that come up constantly and are easy to get wrong from memory:

The submask loop is the one to be able to justify: summed over all masks it visits 3N pairs, not 4N, because each of the N bits is independently in sub, in mask \ sub, or in neither.
That is the complexity of subset-partition DPs, set cover, assignment-with-groups, "split these jobs into shifts", and 3N is a genuinely different regime from 4N.

When N is past the ceiling: meet in the middle. For subset-sum-shaped problems (does a subset hit a target? what is the closest achievable total?) the escape hatch is Horowitz and Sahni's technique (E. Horowitz and S.
Sahni, Computing partitions with applications to the knapsack problem, JACM 21(2), 1974): split the N items into two halves, enumerate all 2(N or 2) subset sums of each half, sort one side, and binary-search it for each element of the other.
Time O(2(N or 2), N), space O(2(N or 2)), which moves the practical ceiling from around 25 items to around 40. It is not a DP at all; it is the answer to "your bitmask DP does not fit, now what," and having it ready is a much stronger response than "then the problem is intractable."

NP-hard problems often have bitmask DP solutions for small N.

In the real world: a field-service product shipped an "optimal visit order" feature built as bitmask TSP over double[1 << n, n], validated against the pilot customer's 14 stops, and gated at 20 in the U I with a tooltip. The gate was a guess, not a calculation.
A larger customer's dispatchers asked for 24, an engineer raised the constant, and the service started getting OOM-killed by the orchestrator during the morning planning window, the table at 24 is 2²⁴ times 24 times 8 bytes, about 3.2 gigabytes, in a pod with a 2 gigabytes limit.
What made it a bad afternoon rather than a five-minute revert is that the process death took the whole planning batch with it, so unrelated customers lost their routes too. Two things came out of it.
The limit became a computed one, the code now works out the table size and refuses the request with a clear error rather than attempting the allocation, and the cell type went from double to int minor units, which halves the table and bought back roughly one city.
The framing worth stealing: for an exponential algorithm, the input limit is not a policy decision, it is arithmetic, and a limit that was chosen rather than derived will be raised by someone who does not know that.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

LCS DP table for s1 = "ABCBDAB" and s2 = "BDCAB":

Coin change DP for coins = [1, 3, 4], amount = 6:

Knapsack DP for weights = [2, 3, 4, 5], values = [3, 4, 5, 6], capacity = 5:

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

No memoization on recursive solution. Naive recursion is O(2ⁿ); memoized is O(n) or O(n times m). The transformation is mechanical; always check for overlapping subproblems before submitting "exponential" as the answer.
Off-by-one in tabulation. dp array size n+1 versus n; loop bounds <= versus <. Pick a convention (1-indexed or 0-indexed) and stay consistent.
Forgotten base cases, and the default that isn't one.
A new int[] arrives zero-filled, and zero is a base case in some DPs ( dp[0] = 0 coins for amount 0) and a wrong answer in others (every non-base cell of a minimising DP should start at an "impossible" sentinel, not at 0, or the minimum will happily choose the uninitialised cell).
Initialise every cell deliberately: Array.Fill(dp, sentinel) first, then write the base cases over the top.
Wrong direction of iteration. For 0 or 1 knapsack with single row: capacity iterates reverse (so item-i isn't double-counted). For unbounded knapsack: forward. Easy to flip and get wrong answer.
State that misses a dimension. Solving "min cost to reach (i, j) on a grid" with dp[i, j] works. Adding a constraint "with at most K right moves" needs dp[i, j, k]. Forgetting a dimension makes the recurrence wrong.
Memoization key collision. If state is (i, j), key into Dictionary. Mixing two state schemes into one dictionary causes wrong cache hits.
Recursion stack overflow on memoized recursion. Memoization bounds the number of subproblems solved; it does nothing about the depth of the chain needed to reach them, and every live call still holds a frame.
There is no depth number to memorise, a frame costs as much as that method's locals and spills, so the rule is about the shape, not the size: if recursion depth is a function of user-supplied input, it is an availability bug, because StackOverflowException is uncatchable and kills the process.
Guard with RuntimeHelpers.TryEnsureSufficientExecutionStack() and convert to tabulation or an explicit Stack.
DP where greedy works. Activity selection (greedy by end time) is O(n log n); writing a DP makes it O(n²). Recognize greedy.
DP where divide-and-conquer works. Mergesort isn't DP, subproblems don't overlap. Don't shoehorn DP onto problems with independent subproblems.
Bitmask DP with n > 25. 230 = 10⁹ states; doesn't fit. Bitmask DP only works for small n.
Mutable state in memoization. If subproblem result depends on a mutable accumulator (for example, a path list), memoization gives wrong results. Either copy state or design a pure recurrence.
Reconstructing the actual solution from DP table. DP gives the value of the optimal; reconstructing the actual choices requires backtracking through the table or storing decisions.
With rolling arrays the table is gone, but see Hirschberg's algorithm, which recovers the path in linear space for a constant factor of time.
A memo sentinel that is also a legal answer. bool[] where false means both "no" and "not computed"; int[] where 0 is a real count or a real cost. The memo silently stops working for exactly those results. Use a sentinel outside the value range, a parallel bool[] computed, or T?.
Memoizing an impure function. If the result depends on anything not in the key, the clock, a cached exchange rate, a static counter, an ambient tenant, the cache serves the first caller's answer to everyone.
The key must contain every input the value depends on, or the function must not be memoized.
A shared memo that is a plain Dictionary. A memoized service registered as a singleton is a multi-threaded write target. Concurrent writes corrupt the bucket chains and the symptom is a thread spinning forever inside a lookup, not an exception.
Use ConcurrentDictionary, and remember its GetOrAdd factory runs outside the lock and may execute more than once per key.
A pooled or reused DP buffer that was not cleared. ArrayPool.Rent returns a buffer that "may not be zero-initialized" and one that is "at least" the requested length. Clear it at one end (rent or return, not both), and take every loop bound from your own n rather than from buffer.Length.
Casting an infinity or MaxValue sentinel. (int)double.PositiveInfinity is silent and its result changed in dot NET 9 (saturating: now int.MaxValue, previously int.MinValue on x86 or x64). int.MaxValue + 1 wraps negative under default unchecked arithmetic.
Test sentinels; never cast or add to them unguarded.
A memo that never stops growing. In a request-scoped DP the cache dies with the request. Promote it to a singleton or an IMemoryCache for reuse and it becomes an unbounded retention: every distinct state anyone ever asked for, held for the life of the process.
Bound it, MemoryCacheOptions.SizeLimit with a Size on every entry, or an explicit eviction policy.
Precomputing DP tables in a loop with captured loop variables. for (int i = 0; i Build(items[i]))); captures the single i, which is n by the time most of the tasks run. C sharp 5 made the foreach iteration variable per-iteration; the for loop variable was deliberately left shared.
Copy to a local inside the body, or use foreach.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

DP requirements: optimal substructure + overlapping subproblems.
Recognition: recursive solution where the same subproblem is computed many times.
Two implementations: memoization (top-down recursive + cache) or tabulation (bottom-up iterative).
State design: identify what parameters change between subproblems. Common: 1D index, 2D (i, j), knapsack (item, capacity), bitmask for subsets, interval (i, j) for ranges.
Classic problems (memorize the recurrences):
Fibonacci, climbing stairs, house robber: 1D, O(n).
Coin change: 1D, O(amount times coins).
LCS, edit distance: 2D, O(m times n).
Knapsack 0 or 1: 2D, O(n times capacity).
LIS: O(n²) DP or O(n log n) with binary search.
Word break: 1D, O(n²).
Matrix chain multiplication: 2D interval DP, O(n³).
DP versus greedy: greedy works when local optima compose; DP needed otherwise. Coin change with [1, 3, 4] is the classic where greedy fails.
Space optimization: rolling arrays. LCS goes from O(m times n) to O(min(m, n)). Knapsack from 2D to 1D (with reverse iteration for 0 or 1).
Bitmask DP: state encodes a subset; O(2n times n²) typical; the n at most 20-25 ceiling is a memory calculation ( 2n times n times sizeof(cell) ), not a C P U one. Past it, meet-in-the-middle handles subset-sum shapes at O(2(n or 2)).
Reconstruction: DP gives the value; backtrack through the table for the actual choices. Space-optimised and reconstructible is possible, Hirschberg's algorithm, at roughly 2 times the time.
State sufficiency: two prefixes reaching the same state must have interchangeable futures. If they don't, the memo is serving one prefix's answer to the other, and the DP is wrong rather than slow.
In C sharp, "add memoization" is a storage decision: array + sentinel (dense, small-integer state), Dictionary with a ValueTuple key (sparse), ConcurrentDictionary (shared), IMemoryCache (must outlive the request, needs a size limit). The sentinel must not be a legal answer.
Allocation is behaviour, not just cost: a per-request table at or 85,000 bytes lands on the LOH and drives gen-2 collections. Shrink it before you pool it.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, DP problem recognition.

Q: How do you recognize a DP problem in the first 30 seconds of an interview?-- think --

A: Two signals. (1) Overlapping subproblems, write the natural recursive solution; if the same subproblem appears in multiple branches of the recursion tree, you have overlapping subproblems to DP.
(2) Optimal substructure, the answer to the whole is built from optimal answers to parts ( min or max or count of sub-answers). Both signals together = DP. Bonus: keywords like "longest," "shortest," "minimum or maximum," "count the number of ways," "can we partition" often signal DP.

Cross-Q: What problems look like DP but aren't?-- think --

A: Divide-and-conquer (mergesort, binary search, FFT) has optimal substructure but no overlapping subproblems, each subproblem is independent.
Greedy problems (activity selection, Huffman coding, Dijkstra) have optimal substructure but local choices suffice, no need for the table of all subproblems. If you can prove the greedy choice is always safe, skip DP for the cheaper greedy.

Cross-Q²: What if I'm not sure?-- think --

A: Write the brute-force recursion. Trace it for n set to 4 or n set to 5. Are subproblem calls repeated? If yes to DP. If subproblems are independent to divide-and-conquer or greedy. The brute-force trace is the cheapest test for DP applicability.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Memoization versus tabulation.

Q: When do I pick memoization (top-down) versus tabulation (bottom-up)?-- think --

A: Memoization for prototyping and sparse state spaces, it mirrors the recursion you'd write anyway; only the states actually visited are computed and stored.
Tabulation for production hot paths and deep state spaces, no recursion-stack risk, easier to space-optimize (rolling arrays), better cache locality. For interview: memoize first; convert to tabulation if asked to optimize space or remove stack.

Cross-Q: Same Big-O, what's the constant-factor difference?-- think --

A: Name the mechanisms rather than a multiplier, because the multiplier depends entirely on how much work the transition does.
Per state visited, memoization pays a call (argument setup, a frame, a return), a cache probe (for a Dictionary: hash the key, index _buckets, walk the chain in _entries comparing keys), and a cache write on a miss.
Tabulation pays an array index, a multiply-add and a bounds check the jit can often hoist out of the loop, and its access pattern is sequential, so the prefetcher works. Against that, memoization visits only reachable states and tabulation visits all of them.
Which side wins is a property of your transition cost and your state density, which is why the answer to "which is faster" is a [Params] sweep, not a number. See the benchmark shape in the Memoization versus tabulation section.

Cross-Q²: When does memoization actually win on perf?-- think --

A: When the state space is sparse, when the reachable subgraph of the dependency DAG is a small fraction of the nominal states = ∏ dimension sizes product. Tabulation's cost is proportional to the nominal count; memoization's is proportional to the reachable count.
So the win scales with the density ratio, and it can be arbitrarily large: a DP whose state is (node, mask) but where only a handful of masks are legal per node has a nominal table that may not even be allocatable and a reachable set that fits in a dictionary.
The corollary matters just as much, at density near 1.0 the dictionary overhead is pure loss, so "memoize for sparse, tabulate for dense" is the rule and measuring your density is how you apply it.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Space optimization.

Q: What's space optimization in DP?-- think --

A: When the recurrence only depends on the previous row or column, drop the unused dimensions. Fibonacci: dp[i] only needs dp[i-1] and dp[i-2] to two variables. LCS 2D dp[i, j] needs only row i-1 and row i to two 1D arrays (or rolling).
Knapsack: cleverly drop to a single 1D array using reverse iteration. Memory drops from O(n²) to O(n) or O(1).

Cross-Q: What's the trade-off?-- think --

A: The naive rolling array loses the ability to reconstruct the actual solution, you still get "minimum edit distance = 5", but the rows you would backtrack through have been overwritten. For length-only or value-only queries, optimize freely.
If you need both, the correct answer is not "keep the full table": it is Hirschberg's algorithm (CACM, 1975), which finds the column where the optimal path crosses the middle row by adding a forward row and a backward row, then recurses on the two quadrants.
Linear space, still quadratic time with a small constant multiplier. Knowing that the trade is "constant factor of time" rather than "space or the path, pick one" is the senior answer here.

Cross-Q²: Knapsack 1D, why iterate capacity in reverse?-- think --

A: To prevent double-counting an item. 1D rolling dp[c] holds "best with items 0.i-1, capacity c." Updating dp[c] = max(dp[c], dp[c - w[i]] + v[i]) for item i: if we iterate forward, dp[c - w[i]] may have already been updated with item i, so the second add of item i double-counts.
Reverse iteration ensures dp[c - w[i]] still reflects "best WITHOUT item i," so the update represents "include item i once."

-- pause --
Drill 4, 0 or 1 knapsack recurrence.

Q: Write the 0 or 1 knapsack recurrence.-- think --

A: State: dp[i, c] = max value using first i items with capacity c. Transitions: skip item i to dp[i, c] = dp[i-1, c]; take item i (if fits) to dp[i, c] = max(dp[i-1, c], dp[i-1, c - w[i]] + v[i]). Base: dp[0, c] = 0 for all c. Time O(n times C), space O(n times C) or O(C) with rolling.

Cross-Q: What's the difference between 0 or 1 and unbounded knapsack?-- think --

A: 0 or 1 = each item picked 0 or 1 time. Unbounded = unlimited copies. The recurrence changes: unbounded takes from dp[i, c - w[i]] (same item index, allows reuse), not dp[i-1, c - w[i]]. In 1D rolling: 0 or 1 iterates capacity reverse; unbounded iterates forward.
Coin change (minimum coins for amount) is unbounded knapsack.

Cross-Q²: Why is knapsack called "pseudo-polynomial"?-- think --

A: The complexity O(n times C) is polynomial in n (item count) and C (capacity value). But the input size of C is log(C) bits, not C itself.
As C grows exponentially in input size (for example, 32-bit capacity = 4 billion), the algorithm is exponential in input size, even though it's polynomial in C's value.
True polynomial algorithms (in input size) for knapsack don't exist; it's NP-hard.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Coin change variations.

Q: Coin change, two common variants. Differentiate.-- think --

A: (1) Minimum coins for amount: dp[a] = min(dp[a-c] + 1 for c in coins if a-c >= 0). Base dp[0] = 0. Returns minimum count (or impossible). (2) Count ways to make amount: dp[a] = sum(dp[a-c] for c in coins if a-c >= 0), but this double-counts orderings (3+2 and 2+3 are different paths).
For combinations (unordered), iterate coins outer, amount inner: for c in coins: for a in [c.target]: dp[a] += dp[a-c].

Cross-Q: Why does iterating coins outside versus inside matter for counting?-- think --

A: Coins outside (outer loop) enforces "consider coin c only after committing to use coins 0.c-1 zero or more times." This gives combinations (no duplicate orderings). Amount outside (outer) considers all coins for each amount to counts permutations (orderings matter).
Subtle but huge difference; classic interview trap.

Cross-Q²: Greedy works for US coins [1, 5, 10, 25], when fails?-- think --

A: For non-canonical denomination sets. Classic: [1, 3, 4] and amount 6, greedy picks 4 + 1 + 1 = 3 coins; DP finds 3 + 3 = 2 coins. The greedy choice property fails when small-coin combinations can match what a single bigger coin can do at lower count.
DP is the safe general solution; greedy is a valid optimization only when you can prove the denomination set is "canonical" (Dijkstra's coin problem).

-- pause --
Drill 6, LCS recurrence.

Q: Longest Common Subsequence, state and recurrence.-- think --

A: State: dp[i, j] = length of LCS of s1[0.i] and s2[0.j]. Recurrence: if s1[i-1] == s2[j-1]: dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1] + 1. Else: dp[i, j] = max(dp[i-1, j], dp[i, j-1]). Base: dp[0, ] = dp[, 0] = 0. Returns dp[m, n].

Cross-Q: How do you reconstruct the actual subsequence?-- think --

A: Backtrack from dp[m, n]. If s1[i-1] == s2[j-1]: this char is in LCS; move to dp[i-1, j-1]. Else: move to whichever neighbor has the same value ( dp[i-1, j] or dp[i, j-1] ). Collect matched chars; reverse at the end. O(m + n) backtracking.

Cross-Q²: LCS versus longest common substring, what's the difference in recurrence?-- think --

A: LCS allows gaps (chars need not be contiguous). LCSubstring requires contiguous match. Recurrence change: if chars match to dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1] + 1. If they don't to reset to 0 (substring broken). LCS keeps the max via the else branch; substring restarts.
Track max(dp[i, j]) across all (i, j), that's the answer. Both O(m times n), different recurrence.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Edit distance (Levenshtein).

Q: Write the edit distance recurrence.-- think --

A: State: dp[i, j] = min edits to transform s1[0.i] into s2[0.j]. If chars match: dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1] (no edit needed). Else: dp[i, j] = 1 + min(dp[i-1, j-1] / substitute /, dp[i-1, j] / delete from s1 /, dp[i, j-1] / insert into s1 /).
Base: dp[i, 0] = i (delete all of s1), dp[0, j] = j (insert all of s2). O(m times n).

Cross-Q: How does Levenshtein vary from Damerau-Levenshtein?-- think --

A: Damerau-Levenshtein adds transposition of adjacent characters as a single edit. Recurrence: also check dp[i-2, j-2] + 1 if s1[i-1] == s2[j-2] and and s1[i-2] == s2[j-1]. Spell-checkers use Damerau-Levenshtein because typos are often transpositions (for example, "teh" for "the").

Cross-Q²: How would I make it support insert or delete with different costs?-- think --

A: Weighted edit distance. Replace the 1 + min(.) with min(dp[i-1, j-1] + sub_cost(s1[i-1], s2[j-1]), dp[i-1, j] + del_cost(s1[i-1]), dp[i, j-1] + ins_cost(s2[j-1])). Same O(m times n).
Used for DNA alignment (insertion or deletion of gaps cost differently than substitutions), OCR error models, plagiarism detection.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Climbing stairs versus Fibonacci.

Q: How are climbing stairs and Fibonacci related?-- think --

A: Same problem. Climbing stairs: n stairs, take 1 or 2 at a time, count ways to reach top. Recurrence: ways(n) = ways(n-1) + ways(n-2). Base: ways(0) = ways(1) = 1. That's Fibonacci shifted by one. Both are O(n) time with DP, O(1) space with rolling variables.

Cross-Q: What if you can take 1, 2, OR 3 steps?-- think --

A: Tribonacci. ways(n) = ways(n-1) + ways(n-2) + ways(n-3). Same DP shape; window of three instead of two. Generalizes: "take k different step sizes" to recurrence with k terms. O(n times k) time, O(k) space.

Cross-Q²: Why not a closed-form Binet's formula for Fibonacci?-- think --

A: Fib(n) = (φⁿ - ψⁿ) / √5 is closed form (φ = golden ratio). Computes in O(1) with floating point, BUT loses precision for n > ~70 (double overflow / rounding). For exact arbitrary-precision integers, iterative O(n) DP wins.
Matrix exponentiation gives O(log n) exact, for n = 10⁹, that's ~30 steps versus 10⁹.

-- pause --
Drill 9, House robber.

Q: Houses in a row, can't rob adjacent. Recurrence?-- think --

A: State: dp[i] = max loot considering first i houses. Transitions: skip house i to dp[i] = dp[i-1]; rob house i to dp[i] = dp[i-2] + loot[i]. Combined: dp[i] = max(dp[i-1], dp[i-2] + loot[i]). Base: dp[0] = loot[0], dp[1] = max(loot[0], loot[1]). O(n) time, O(1) space.

Cross-Q: What if houses are in a circle (first and last are adjacent)?-- think --

A: Run the linear DP twice: once excluding the last house (can rob first) and once excluding the first house (can rob last). Take max of the two. The constraint "first and last adjacent" forces this case-split.

Cross-Q²: What if you can rob k apart (for example, must skip at least 2 between robberies)?-- think --

A: dp[i] = max(dp[i-1], dp[i-k-1] + loot[i]). The recurrence depends on k. State remains 1D. Same O(n) time. The general "adjacency constraint" is a sliding window of k positions you can't pick.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Subset sum / knapsack relation.

Q: How is subset sum related to knapsack?-- think --

A: Subset sum is 0 or 1 knapsack with value[i] = weight[i] and asking "is there a subset summing to target?" Recurrence: dp[i, s] = true if some subset of items 0.i-1 sums to s. Transitions: skip item i to dp[i, s] = dp[i-1, s]; include item i to dp[i, s] = dp[i-1, s] OR dp[i-1, s - w[i]].
Base: dp[*, 0] = true. O(n times target).

Cross-Q: What's the space optimization?-- think --

A: Same 1D rolling trick as knapsack. dp[s] bool array. For each item: iterate s reverse from target down to w[i]; dp[s] |= dp[s - w[i]]. Reverse iteration avoids reusing item i. O(target) space.

Cross-Q²: Partition into two equal-sum subsets, variation?-- think --

A: Compute total sum; if odd, impossible. Else target = total or 2. Run subset sum looking for target. If dp[target] is true, partition exists. O(n times total) time. Used in fair partitioning, balanced load distribution, equal-task scheduling.

-- pause --
Drill 11, DP versus greedy.

Q: When do you pick DP over greedy?-- think --

A: When local choices don't compose to a global optimum. Greedy: activity selection (sort by end time, pick non-conflicting), provably optimal via exchange argument. DP: 0 or 1 knapsack, greedy by value or weight ratio fails (counterexample exists). The test: can you prove greedy correctness?
If yes, use it (O(n log n) typically); if not, fall back to DP (O(n times W) or worse).

Cross-Q: Coin change, when can greedy work?-- think --

A: Only for canonical denomination sets. US [1, 5, 10, 25] and sterling [1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200] are canonical; the arbitrary set [1, 3, 4] at amount 6 is not, greedy picks 4+1+1 = 3 coins, DP finds 3+3 = 2.
Greedy validity depends on the specific denominations, not on the problem shape, so it is a property you have to check per coin system. Two results make checking cheap.
Kozen and Zaks (1994) proved that if a system 1 = c₁ <. < c_m is non-canonical, the smallest counterexample lies strictly between c₃ + 1 and c_m + c_{m−1}, a finite window you can brute-force in a unit test. Pearson (2005) gave an O(m³) decision algorithm.
Note what this is not: it is not a matroid argument. Matroid theory explains greedy for MST and for scheduling-with-deadlines; coin systems are not matroids, and citing matroids here is a common and checkable error. If unsure: DP is safe.

Cross-Q²: Fractional knapsack versus 0 or 1, different answer?-- think --

A: Fractional (can split items) is greedy: sort by value or weight ratio descending; take items until full; take a fraction of the last. Provably optimal. 0 or 1 (can't split) is DP: greedy fails. The "fractional" constraint is what unlocks greedy.
Lesson: the same problem with different constraints can be greedy or DP, recognize the variant.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Top-down versus bottom-up, same complexity?.

Q: Memoization and tabulation have the same Big-O. Are they equivalent?-- think --

A: Asymptotically yes; practically not always. Memoization may skip unreachable states; tabulation computes all states. For dense state spaces (every state reachable), tabulation is faster constants. For sparse state spaces, memoization saves time AND memory by only computing reachable states.

Cross-Q: What about cache locality?-- think --

A: Tabulation usually wins on locality, it walks the table in address order, so the hardware prefetcher predicts the next line and the jit can hoist bounds checks out of a counted loop.
Memoization scatters: a Dictionary probe reads _buckets then jumps into _entries at a data-dependent index, and the recursion interleaves those reads with frame setup.
Both are the same Big-O; the difference is entirely in how many cache lines each state visit touches, which is why the honest form of this answer is a measurement rather than a factor.
Note that the direction can reverse for a sparse DP, where tabulation's sequential walk is sequential over states nobody needs.

Cross-Q²: What's the deciding factor in production?-- think --

A: Stack risk, and it is a step change rather than a gradient. Memoization recurses, and a StackOverflowException cannot be caught, the process terminates, taking every other in-flight request with it, with no exception in the logs. Tabulation iterates; there is no stack to exhaust.
There is no depth threshold worth memorising, because a frame costs whatever that method's locals and spills cost;
the question to ask instead is "can input data make this deeper?" If yes, that is an availability bug and tabulation (or an explicit Stack ) is the fix, with RuntimeHelpers.TryEnsureSufficientExecutionStack() as the guard while you get there.
Use memoization for prototyping; harden the hot or input-driven paths.

-- pause --
Drill 13, State definition, the hardest part.

Q: Why is "defining the state" called the hardest part of DP?-- think --

A: Because the recurrence is mechanical once the state is right, but the state is creative. Common mistakes: too few dimensions (recurrence wrong), too many (extra dimensions slow it down).
The state must (a) uniquely identify a subproblem so memoization works, (b) be small enough that the state space is tractable, (c) expose the recurrence, adjacent states should relate via a few options.

Cross-Q: Give a problem where state design matters.-- think --

A: "Burst balloons", pop balloons in some order to maximize coin score (coins depend on neighbors). Natural state dp[i] (last popped) doesn't capture which balloons remain. Right state: dp[i, j] = max coins from popping all balloons in range (i, j) exclusive. Decision: which balloon to pop last.
This inverted thinking ("pop last, not first") is the key insight; without it, the recurrence is wrong.

Cross-Q²: How do you know if your state is right?-- think --

A: Test with small n by hand. n set to 3 or n set to 4. Write what the answer should be; check if your recurrence produces it. If the recurrence gives a wrong answer for small n, the state is missing something.
The trap: passing all unit tests on n at most 10 doesn't mean correctness, DP bugs often hide at specific state combinations only triggered by larger inputs.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Bitmask DP.

Q: When is bitmask DP applicable?-- think --

A: When state includes a subset of N items and N at most ~20-25. Encode the subset as a bitmask (32-bit int). Use cases: TSP (visited cities mask), assignment problem (assigned tasks mask), subset-sum variants, "best path visiting these nodes." Beyond N = 25, 225 approximately 33M states explodes.

Cross-Q: Walk through bitmask state for TSP.-- think --

A: State: dp[mask, current] = min cost of a path visiting cities in mask, ending at current. Transition: from dp[mask, u], try adding city v not in mask: dp[mask | (1<<v), v] = min(dp[., v], dp[mask, u] + dist[u, v]). Base: dp[{start}, start] = 0.
Answer: min over u of dp[full Mask, u] + dist[u, start] (return to start).

Cross-Q²: Why N set to 25 limit?-- think --

A: Do the arithmetic rather than quoting the rule, memory is what binds first, and it is a two-line calculation. The table is 2N times N cells.
At N set to 20 with a double cell that is 2²⁰ times 20 times 8 B approximately 168 megabytes; at N set to 22, approximately 738 megabytes; at N set to 25, approximately 6.7 gigabytes.
A service pod does not have 6.7 gigabytes, so the feature does not exist at 25 regardless of how patient you are about C P U. The levers this exposes: halving the cell (integer minor units instead of double ) buys about one more city, and nothing buys five, because the table doubles per city.
Say the arithmetic in the interview, it demonstrates you can derive the boundary instead of having memorised one, and it is the same "count the states, multiply by the cell size" move that sizes every other DP.

-- pause --
Drill 15, DP on trees.

Q: What's "DP on trees" and how does it work?-- think --

A: DFS on the tree; at each node, compute the answer as a function of its children's answers. State: dp[node] or dp[node, state]. Recurrence: combine children's results.
Example: longest path in a tree, at each node, the longest path through it is max_child_depth(left) + max_child_depth(right) + 1; global answer is max over all nodes. O(N), one DFS.

Cross-Q: Concrete example?-- think --

A: "Maximum sum of a path from any node to any node in a tree." For each node u: down(u) = max sum of a path from u down to some descendant. Recurrence: down(u) = max(0, max over children c of (val(u) + down(c))). Global answer: max over all u of val(u) + max two highest down(c) values.
The "path through u" connects two of u's subtrees. O(N) single DFS.

Cross-Q²: When is DP on trees harder than DP on arrays?-- think --

A: When state requires multiple values per node. Example: "house robber on a tree", at each node, track two states: (max if not robbed, max if robbed). Returning a tuple from the recursive call.
The recurrence: not Robbed = max(child.not Robbed, child.robbed) summed over children; robbed = node.val + sum of child.not Robbed. Compose carefully; the tuple is essentially the state's second dimension.

-- pause --
Drill 16, What do you memoize into?.

Q: You've decided on top-down. What do you store the memo in, in C sharp?-- think --

A: Four options with different costs. T[] or T[,] with a sentinel, index arithmetic and a bounds check; right whenever the state is dense and indexed by small integers, which is most interview DPs.
Dictionary, hash, bucket index, walk the chain in _entries; right when the state is sparse or the key isn't small integers. Key it with a ValueTuple, never an interpolated string.
ConcurrentDictionary, same shape, safe to share, and its GetOrAdd factory runs outside the lock so it can execute more than once per key. IMemoryCache, when the memo must outlive the request and be evictable; needs SizeLimit and a per-entry Size or it grows forever.
Sizing rule for the first: pre-size the dictionary with the expected state count, or a long run pays a sequence of full rehashes.

Cross-Q: You picked int[] and initialised it to zero. What breaks?-- think --

A: 0 is a legal answer in most DPs, so "not computed yet" and "the answer is zero" become indistinguishable. Reads miss forever, or worse, hit and return a value that was never computed.
The same trap bites hardest with bool[] in a yes or no DP: false means both "no" and "unvisited", so only positive results are ever cached and the algorithm degrades back to exponential on precisely the inputs that answer "no".
Fixes: a sentinel outside the value range ( Array.Fill(dp, -1) ), a parallel bool[] computed, or int?[], no boxing, but Nullable is a bool plus an int with alignment padding, so the cell goes from 4 bytes to 8 and the table doubles.

Cross-Q²: CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrAddDefault gives you get-or-insert in one hash. Why not use it for the memo?-- think --

A: Because the documented contract is "items should not be added to or removed from the Dictionary while the ref TValue is in use," and recursive memoization violates it by construction:
the computation you run to fill the slot recurses and inserts other keys, and any insert can trigger a resize that reallocates _entries.
Your ref then points into the orphaned array and the write is lost, silently, with no exception, leaving the entry at its default and recomputing forever. It's the right tool for a tabulation-shaped fill where you compute the value first and take the ref second, and the wrong tool here.

-- pause --
Drill 17, Is your state sufficient?.

Q: What does it mean for a DP state to be "correct"? Not "does it work", what's the property?-- think --

A: Sufficiency: any two paths that arrive at the same state must have interchangeable futures.
If two different prefixes both reach state s and the optimal continuation from s differs between them, s is not a state, it's a lossy summary, and memoization is then actively wrong, because the cache's whole premise is "same state, same answer." This is the Markov property;
it's what makes caching legal rather than merely fast.

Cross-Q: Test it on "maximum profit from at most K stock transactions."-- think --

A: Propose (day). Two prefixes reach day 5, one having used all K trades and one none; their futures differ, so it fails. Add trades: (day, trades Used). Two prefixes reach (day 5, 2 used), one holding a share and one not; only one can sell tomorrow, so it still fails.
Add the position: (day, trades Used, holding). Now the futures genuinely are interchangeable. Each failed test named exactly one missing dimension, that's the procedure, and it turns state design from a creative act into a checklist.

Cross-Q²: What's the production smell that a state has gone insufficient?-- think --

A: A new requirement containing the words "so far", "cumulative", "remaining", "up to", or "at most". Those phrases are dimensions.
Adding such a rule to the transition without adding it to the state gives you a DP that is right whenever the constraint isn't binding, which is most inputs, and wrong for the extremes. The output stays plausible, so tests pass and monitoring is quiet; it surfaces in reconciliation months later.

-- pause --
Drill 18, Linear space and the path.

Q: You space-optimised edit distance to two rows and the caller still needs the edit script. Now what?-- think --

A: Hirschberg's algorithm. Split s1 at its midpoint. Run the forward rolling DP down to that row, keeping only the final row; run the same DP backwards from the end up to that row on reversed inputs, keeping only its final row; add the two rows elementwise and take the argmax.
That column is where the optimal path crosses the midpoint, one point on the path, found in O(n) space. Recurse on the two quadrants. Work halves each level, so the total is about twice a single pass: O(m, n) time, O(min(m,n)) space, full reconstruction.

Cross-Q: What's the cost you're accepting?-- think --

A: A constant factor of time (roughly 2 times, from the geometric series) and considerably more code than "keep two rows." You're trading C P U for memory, which is the right trade when the table is the thing that OOMs you and the wrong trade when it isn't.
The practical design is a threshold: full table a size where it's cheap, Hirschberg it.

Cross-Q²: Where would I have seen this?-- think --

A: Sequence alignment (it was published for exactly that, CACM 1975) and diff tools, Myers' diff algorithm, which git diff is built on, carries a linear-space refinement built on the same divide-at-the-middle idea.

-- pause --
Drill 19, The DP that costs you memory you didn't budget.

Q: Your DP allocates its table per request. What do you have to know about that in dot NET?-- think --

A: The 85,000-byte line. At or it, the object goes on the large object heap, which is collected only with generation 2 and swept rather than compacted by default.
Dividing through (and allowing for the array header), an int[] crosses it a little over 21,000 elements and a double[] a little over 10,600.
So a DP table that looks like an ordinary local variable can be the reason your service's garbage collector trigger reason is AllocLarge and its gen-2 rate is high.
Microsoft's own LOH guidance says to pool and reuse large objects rather than allocating temporary ones.

Cross-Q: So you switch to ArrayPool.Shared. What breaks?-- think --

A: Two documented behaviours that DP code routinely assumes away. Rent(minimum Length) returns a buffer that is "at least" the requested length, so buffer.Length is no longer your table width and any loop bounded by it walks into another tenant's data.
And the returned array "may not be zero-initialized", so every base case that relied on default is now reading whatever the previous renter left. Clear at exactly one end, Array.Clear(buf, 0, n) after rent, or Return(buf, clear Array: true), and take every bound from your own n.

Cross-Q²: How would you decide between pooling and just making the table smaller?-- think --

A: Make it smaller first, because it's strictly better: a rolling array that drops the table under 85,000 bytes removes the LOH problem and the pooling complexity and the initialisation hazard. Reach for the pool only when the table is irreducibly large.
And measure the right column, [MemoryDiagnoser] 's Allocated is total churn per operation, not peak live set, so it answers "how hard is this on the collector," not "will this fit in the container." Those are different failure modes with different fixes.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

DP requires: optimal substructure + overlapping subproblems.
Top-down: recursion + memoization ( Dictionary ); intuitive, stack risk.
Bottom-up: tabulation; iterative, no stack risk, easier to space-optimize.
State: parameters that uniquely identify a subproblem, index, capacity, mask.
Knapsack 0 or 1: 2D dp[i, w]; capacity loop reverse in 1D rolling form.
Knapsack unbounded: 1D dp[w]; capacity loop forward.
LCS / edit distance: 2D O(m times n); space-optimize to two rows.
LIS: O(n²) DP or O(n log n) with patience-sort + binary search.
Bitmask DP: state = subset bitmap; n at most ~20 (2n states).
Greedy not equal to DP: greedy works only when local optima compose globally, coin change with [1,3,4] breaks it.
Greedy change-making is safe only for canonical denomination sets; Kozen, Zaks bounds the smallest counterexample c_m + c_{m−1}, so an exhaustive check is a unit test, not a research project.
State is sufficient when two arrivals at the same state have interchangeable futures. That is what makes the cache legal. "So far", "cumulative", "remaining" in a requirement = a new dimension.
Swap state and value when one dimension is huge and the stored quantity is small: LIS dp[i] set to length to f[len] set to min tail (O(n log n)); knapsack dp[i,c] set to max value to g[i,v] set to min weight (O(n, ΣV)).
Size the table before coding: states times sizeof(cell). Bitmask TSP at N set to 20 is ~168 megabytes of double; at N set to 25 it is ~6.7 gigabytes. That is the real "N at most 20, 25" rule.
Memo sentinel: default must not be a legal answer. bool[] where false means "no" is the classic silent failure.
85,000 bytes puts a DP table on the LOH (gen-2, swept not compacted), a little over 21,000 int s. Rolling arrays first; ArrayPool second, and Rent returns a longer, uncleared buffer.
Linear space and reconstruction are both achievable: Hirschberg's algorithm, ~2 times time.
Stack: memoisation bounds the number of subproblems, not the depth. StackOverflowException is uncatchable; guard with RuntimeHelpers.TryEnsureSufficientExecutionStack().

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Exponential recursion on coin change.

Problem: A subscription billing service computes the minimum number of coupon stacks (in denominations [1, 5, 10, 25, 50] ) to cover a refund amount.
Naive recursion works for small amounts but hangs for amount = 100 in production, with C P U pinned on one core until the gateway times the request out.

Two defects, and it is worth separating them because only one of them is the DP lesson. First, there is no base case: at amount == 0 the Where yields nothing and Enumerable.Min over an empty sequence of a non-nullable value type throws InvalidOperationException: Sequence contains no elements.
The correct recursion is amount == 0? 0: coins.Where(.).Min(.). Second, and this is the real subject, it is exponential.

Diagnosis: don't guess at the magnitude, derive it. Let T(a) be the number of calls for amount a. The body makes one call per usable coin, so.

That is itself a five-line DP, and running it over [1, 5, 10, 25, 50] gives exact counts you can reproduce rather than remember:

20. 752.
30. 16,068.
40. 343,065.
50. 7,325,746.
100. 32,528,290,937,758.

Roughly a 21 times jump per ten units of amount, which is the signature of exponential growth in a, the dominant root of that linear recurrence, not any constant raised to the amount.
Thirty-two trillion calls will not complete inside a request, which is the observed behaviour; the useful discipline is that the counter in a unit test at amount = 30 and again at 40 gives you the growth ratio, and the ratio is the diagnosis.
Recognize the structure too: Min(100) calls Min(99), Min(95), Min(90), Min(75), Min(50); Min(99) calls Min(98), Min(94), Min(89), Min(74), Min(49). The same subproblems ( Min(75), Min(50),. ) are recomputed over and over. This is overlapping subproblems, the canonical DP signal.

Fix: Add memoization (top-down) or tabulation (bottom-up). Both are O(amount times coins).

Why it works: memoization caches each subproblem's answer the first time it is computed; subsequent calls hit the cache in O(1).
Count the states and the choices per state, as the DAG model says: 101 states (amounts 0 through 100), 5 choices each, so at most 505 transition evaluations replace 32,528,290,937,758 calls. Same recurrence, same answer, and the work is now linear in the amount.

Two footnotes a senior candidate should add unprompted. The memo array is int[] filled with -1 rather than left at its default, because 0 is the legal answer for amount 0 and would collide with "not computed"; that choice is deliberate, not incidental.
And greedy, always take the largest coin that fits, does give the right answer for [1, 5, 10, 25, 50], because that set is canonical. It is not right in general: [1, 20, 50] at amount 60 makes greedy pay eleven coupons where three suffice.
If the denomination table is configuration rather than a constant, validate it (see DP versus greedy) rather than assuming.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Memoization is top-down: write the natural recursion, cache results in a dictionary or array keyed by state. Tabulation is bottom-up: explicitly iterate from base cases to the final answer, filling a table.
Memoization is faster to write (mirrors the recursion you'd have written anyway), handles sparse state spaces (only computed states use memory), and is easier to debug.
Tabulation has no recursion-stack overhead (safer for deep chains, n > 10⁵), allows space optimization (rolling arrays, drop dimensions you don't need), and often has better cache locality.
Choose memoization for prototyping or sparse states; tabulation for production hot paths or when stack depth matters.

Maintain tails[k] = smallest possible tail of any increasing subsequence of length k+1. For each a[i], binary-search the position in tails where a[i] would go (lower-bound, replacing the first tails[j] >= a[i] ). If a[i] exceeds all tails, append it (subsequence is one longer).
Final answer: tails.Count.

This isn't a literal LIS, tails doesn't hold the actual subsequence, but the count is correct. The O(n log n) comes from binary search inside an O(n) loop.

Greedy wins when (a) the problem has the greedy choice property, locally optimal choices always lead to a globally optimal solution; (b) you can prove the property (exchange argument or matroid theory).
Examples: activity selection (sort by end time, take non-conflicting), Dijkstra's relaxation (always extract min), Huffman coding, MST (Prim or Kruskal). Greedy is O(n log n) typically versus DP's O(n²) or O(n times W).
Greedy fails on coin change with non-canonical denominations ( [1, 3, 4], target 6: greedy picks 4+1+1 set to 3 coins, DP finds 3+3 set to 2 coins). Rule: try greedy first if you can prove correctness; fall back to DP when local choices interact non-trivially.

LCS recurrence: dp[i, j] = dp[i-1, j-1] + 1 if match, else max(dp[i-1, j], dp[i, j-1]). Notice the recurrence only references row i-1 (previous) and row i (current). You don't need rows 0.i-2 ever again.
Replace the 2D table with two 1D arrays ( prev, curr ); after computing curr for row i, swap the references, a tuple deconstruction, not a copy. Memory drops from O(m times n) to O(2 times min(m,n)) approximately O(min(m,n)).

Do the arithmetic, because it is what makes the optimisation worth doing: at m = n = 10⁴ the full table is (10⁴+1)² ints approximately 10⁸ cells times 4 bytes approximately 400 megabytes, on the large object heap and collected only with gen 2;
two rows are 2 times 10,001 times 4 approximately 80 kilobytes in total, each row about 40 kilobytes, comfortably under the 85,000-byte LOH threshold, so each is an ordinary gen-0 allocation.
The optimisation changes the kind of allocation, not just its size.

Trade-off: the naive two-row form loses the table needed to reconstruct the actual subsequence, so only the length survives. For length-only queries, optimise freely.
If you need the path and the space, the answer is Hirschberg's algorithm (linear space, full reconstruction, roughly 2 times the time), not "keep the full table."

Work through what a probe actually costs, rather than reaching for a multiplier. (a) Every lookup does more work than an index.
Dictionary hashes the key, masks it to a bucket, reads _buckets, then follows the int next chain through _entries comparing keys, versus an array index, which is a multiply-add and one bounds check the jit can frequently hoist out of a counted loop. (b) The access pattern is data-dependent.
The bucket index comes from a hash, so consecutive states land in unrelated cache lines and the prefetcher cannot help; a table walk is sequential. (c) It may be growing under you.
A memo that fills as the DP runs rehashes every entry into a larger _entries array each time it fills, pre-size it with new Dictionary(expected States). (d) Check the key isn't allocating.
ValueTuple is a struct and does not box (its GetHashCode funnels into HashCode.Combine ), but an interpolated string key allocates on every probe including hits, which is the single most common version of this bug.

The fix, when the state ranges are bounded (say 0 at most i at most 1000, 0 at most j at most 1000, 0 at most k at most 100 ): replace the dictionary with int[1001, 1001, 101] filled with a -1 sentinel.
Before you do, price it, 1001 times 1001 times 101 times 4 bytes approximately 405 megabytes, which is on the large object heap and may be worse than the dictionary was.
That calculation is the actual decision: array memo when the nominal state space is both bounded and affordable; dictionary when it is sparse, unbounded, or too big to allocate. And whichever you pick, settle "which is faster" with a [Params] sweep over state density, not with a remembered ratio.

bool[] is zero-initialised, so false is simultaneously "the answer is no" and "I haven't computed this yet." Only positive results are ever recorded as cache hits.
On an input whose answer is yes, the first success short-circuits the search and everything looks fine; on an input whose answer is no, every subproblem is recomputed and you are back to the exponential search the memo was supposed to remove.
So the profile is not "uniformly slow", it is fast on yes, exponential on no, which is why a test corpus built from valid examples never catches it.

Three fixes, in order of preference. A sentinel outside the value range: sbyte[] or int[] filled with -1, with 0 = no and 1 = yes; one array, one branch, one cache line. A parallel bool[] computed: no encoding, works for any value type, costs a second read.
bool?[]: clearest to read, no boxing ( Nullable is a struct), but the cell carries a flag plus the value with alignment padding, so the table grows.

The generalisation is the part worth saying: this is not a bool problem, it is a sentinel collision problem. int[] for a counting DP where zero ways is a real answer, or a minimising DP where zero cost is a real answer, has the identical defect.
After choosing the memo type, finish the sentence "and the value meaning not yet computed is ___."

The mechanism is the large object heap. Any object at or 85,000 bytes is allocated on the LOH, which is collected only during a generation 2 collection and is swept rather than compacted by default.
Dividing through (allowing for the array header), an int[] crosses that line a little over 21,000 elements and a double[] a little over 10,600, so a per-request DP table of quite modest dimensions is a large object,
and a stream of them drives gen-2 collections whose trigger reason a PerfView trace will show as AllocLarge, with an LOH survival rate near zero.
That last detail is the tell: the objects are large and short-lived, which is the worst combination, because you pay full-heap collections to reclaim garbage that died immediately.

The fix ladder, cheapest and safest first:

Make the table smaller. Rolling arrays. If two rows put you under 85,000 bytes, the problem is gone entirely and you have added no complexity, no pooling, and no new failure mode. Always try this first.
Reduce the cell. int instead of long, minor units instead of double, sbyte for a small enumeration. Halving the cell halves the table.
Pool it. ArrayPool.Shared.Rent / Return, Microsoft's own LOH guidance recommends reusing a pool of large objects rather than allocating temporary ones.
But this changes two contracts your DP probably depends on: Rent returns a buffer "at least" the requested length (so buffer.Length is no longer your width) and one that "may not be zero-initialized" (so default base cases are now garbage).
Clear at exactly one end and bound every loop by your own n.
stackalloc for genuinely small rows, behind a size guard, and never inside a loop, stackalloc releases at method exit, not iteration exit.

Say which column you would measure, too: [MemoryDiagnoser] 's Allocated is total churn per operation, not peak live set. Churn is a throughput problem; live set is an OOM problem. This is the first.

The O(n²) version indexes by position and stores a length: dp[i] = length of the longest increasing subsequence ending at index i, and the transition scans every j < i.
The O(n log n) version swaps the state and the value: f[len] = the smallest value that can end an increasing subsequence of length len.

That inversion is the whole algorithm.
Because a longer increasing subsequence can never have a smaller tail than a shorter one, f is automatically sorted, so the transition, "find the shortest subsequence whose tail is at least x and improve its tail to x," becomes a binary search instead of a linear scan.
Appending when x exceeds every tail is the case where the answer grows. f.Count at the end is the length. f itself is not the subsequence, which is why reconstruction needs a separate parent array.

The reason to be able to say this rather than just code it: the same substitution is a general technique, not an LIS quirk. Whenever one dimension of your state ranges over something enormous and the quantity you are storing ranges over something small, trade them.
Knapsack does it too, dp[i, c] = max value in capacity c costs O(n, C), while g[i, v] = minimum weight to reach value v costs O(n, ΣV), and you get to pick whichever of capacity and total value is smaller.
Interviewers who ask "can you do better than O(n²)?" are usually asking whether you know this move exists.