-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

Window functions are the senior-tier sequel feature. They compute aggregates without collapsing rows, every row stays in the result, and each gets a value computed over a "window" of related rows.
Running totals, moving averages, percent rank, "previous and next value" comparisons, top-N-per-group, all become one-liners.

Before window functions (introduced in sequel:2003 but only widely supported by ~2012), these problems required correlated subqueries, self-joins, or application-layer post-processing. Window functions reduced them to clear, fast sequel.
Knowing them is the line between "solid sequel" and "sequel fluent."

For interviews, expect at least one window-function problem at the senior level. The patterns cover the bar.

When NOT to use: simple aggregations that do collapse rows (use GROUP BY ). Top-1 retrievals where ORDER BY. LIMIT 1 is enough. Don't reach for window functions when a simpler form works.

The second-order thing interviewers probe is not "can you write ROW_NUMBER " but "do you know what the window can see, what it costs, and where the engines disagree". Those three questions run through the rest of this page.

In the real world: a revenue-share tile computed each product's contribution as 100.0 * sales / SUM(sales) OVER (), and it was right for a year.
Then a category filter was added to the screen, and every product's share went up, support logged it as "the percentages don't add up any more", which was exactly backwards: they still added to 100%, just to 100% of the filtered set.
The window function runs after WHERE, so its population is whatever survived the filter, and the denominator had quietly become "sales in the selected category" instead of "sales overall".
The fix was to compute the grand total in its own C T E over the unfiltered table and cross-join it in, so the denominator stopped depending on the screen state. The durable lesson: OVER () does not mean "the whole table", it means "the whole row set this query produced by the time the window runs".

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
The OVER (.) clause.

Every window function is a normal aggregate or value function followed by OVER (.). The OVER clause defines the window, the set of rows the function operates on for each row in the result.

OVER () with no clauses means "the whole result set is the window." Every row gets the same company_avg.

OVER (.) accepts three optional clauses:
PARTITION BY, group the rows into windows by the partition key.
ORDER BY, order rows within the partition.
frame clause ( ROWS BETWEEN. AND. ), restrict the window to rows in a range.

Now dept_avg is averaged per department, and rank_in_dept ranks each employee within their department.

Two things the OVER clause does not do.

It does not order the result. The ORDER BY inside OVER sequences rows for the computation only. Microsoft's OVER clause documentation spells out the split in its ROW_NUMBER example: "The ORDER BY clause specified in the OVER clause orders the rows in each partition by the column SalesYTD.
The ORDER BY clause in the SELECT statement determines the order in which the entire query result set is returned." Rows often come back in window order because the engine had to sort them anyway, that is an artefact of the plan, not a guarantee,
and it changes the day the plan goes parallel or an index removes the sort.
If the caller needs an order, write a query-level ORDER BY.

It does not see rows the query already discarded. The window's input is the row set as it exists after FROM, WHERE, GROUP BY and HAVING. SUM(x) OVER () is the total of the surviving rows, not of the table.
Same reasoning in reverse: a window function cannot be referenced in WHERE or HAVING, because it has not been computed yet. On Postgres Q L the rule is stated flatly, "Window function calls are permitted only in the SELECT list and the ORDER BY clause of the query."

Reusing one window definition across several functions is standard sequel, spelled WINDOW:

Postgres Q L and MySQL 8 have supported this for years. sequel Server got it in 2022 (16.x), and the documentation is explicit that it "requires database compatibility level 160 or higher", on a 2022 instance still running at level 150 the query is rejected, which is a confusing first encounter.

-- pause --
Ranking functions: ROW_NUMBER, RANK, DENSE_RANK, NTILE.

Assign a numeric rank to each row, ordered by the ORDER BY clause inside OVER.

Differences shown when there are ties (same salary):

ROW_NUMBER: always unique 1, 2, 3,. within the partition. When the ORDER BY has ties, which tied row gets the lower number is undefined, not "insertion order", not "clustered index order", just undefined.
It can differ between two runs of the same statement on the same data if the plan changes (a new index, a parallel plan, a different row on a replica).
RANK: ties get same rank; gap to next ("Olympic" ranking, bronze can be 4 if two silvers).
DENSE_RANK: ties get same rank; no gap (sequential).

That "undefined" is not pedantry. ROW_NUMBER is the standard de-duplication tool, rank the duplicates, delete everything with rn > 1, and a PARTITION BY with an ambiguous ORDER BY makes the statement pick an arbitrary survivor.
sequel Server says so outright:
" ROW_NUMBER() is nondeterministic", and "There is no guarantee that the rows returned by a query using ROW_NUMBER() will be ordered exactly the same with each execution", the article's conditions for that guarantee are that the partitioning values, the ORDER BY values,
and their combinations are all unique.
Postgres Q L does not use the word, but the same follows from what it does guarantee, the ranking functions "give the same answer for all rows of a peer group", which says nothing about which peer is numbered first.
Add enough ORDER BY columns to make the ordering total (usually the primary key as the last tie-breaker) whenever the row number decides which row lives.

In the real world: a nightly job de-duplicated an imported customers staging table with ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY email ORDER BY created_at DESC) and deleted rn > 1.
Bulk imports wrote whole batches with the same created_at to the millisecond, so within a batch the ordering was a tie and the engine picked a survivor at whim. Nobody noticed while the job ran on one server.
When a second worker was added and the same batch got re-processed after a retry, the two runs kept different rows, different customer_id, so the downstream orders that referenced the deleted id were orphaned.
The fix was a single extra column, ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC, which made the ordering total and the choice reproducible. The review rule that came out of it: any ROW_NUMBER whose value drives a DELETE or a MERGE must have a tie-breaker that is unique by construction.

NTILE(n) divides rows into n roughly-equal buckets:

Used for: percentiles ("top decile customers"), cohort analysis ("which quartile by spend").

NTILE divides by row count, not by value, and that is the whole of its danger, two customers who spent the same amount can land in different buckets, and a bucket is not a range of values but a range of positions.

In the real world: a loyalty programme granted its top tier to NTILE(10) = 10 by annual spend.
The tier was therefore always exactly 10% of the customer base by construction, so in a quiet quarter, customers who had spent very little got the top tier, and in a strong quarter, customers who had spent well were pushed out of it.
Support fielded both complaints and could not explain either, because the query was "obviously" correct. Worse, the boundary between deciles 9 and 10 frequently split customers with identical spend into different tiers, since NTILE breaks ties by position.
The programme's actual intent was a threshold ("spend over £X"), and once that was written as a plain WHERE, the tier stopped moving under customers' feet.
NTILE answers "where does this row sit in the ordering"; it never answers "is this row a value", and business rules are almost always the second question.

-- pause --
Value functions: LAG, LEAD, FIRST_VALUE, LAST_VALUE.

Reference values from other rows in the window without joining the table to itself.

LAG(col, offset, default), value from a previous row.

LAG(total, 2) for two rows back; default offset is 1.

LEAD(col, offset, default), value from a following row. Same shape, opposite direction.

FIRST_VALUE(col) / LAST_VALUE(col), value at the start / end of the window.

LAST_VALUE is trickier, by default the frame ends at the current row, so LAST_VALUE returns the current row's value. To get the actual last value of the partition:

The frame clause matters; covered.

NTH_VALUE(col, n), the n-th row of the frame. Same frame trap as LAST_VALUE: with the default frame, NTH_VALUE(x, 3) is NULL until the frame has three rows in it.
The standard's FROM LAST variant is nowhere to be had, MySQL "permits only FROM FIRST " and parses FROM LAST into an error, Postgres Q L likewise implements only the default FROM FIRST, and sequel Server has no NTH_VALUE at all. Both manuals give the same workaround: reverse the ORDER BY.

Null treatment is the least portable corner of this whole topic. The standard defines IGNORE NULLS / RESPECT NULLS for LAG, LEAD, FIRST_VALUE, LAST_VALUE and NTH_VALUE. Where you actually get it:

sequel Server, maps to, 2022 (16.x) and later, on LAG, LEAD, FIRST_VALUE, LAST_VALUE. Also Azure sequel Database / MI. Patch before you trust it: CU4 for sequel Server 2022 (KB5026717) fixed incorrect results from LAG / LEAD with IGNORE NULLS.
Postgres Q L, maps to, Not implemented as of 18. The manual says so explicitly: the option "is not implemented in Postgres Q L: the behavior is always the same as the standard's default, namely RESPECT NULLS ".
MySQL 8, maps to, Only RESPECT NULLS. The manual notes IGNORE NULLS "is parsed, but produces an error", same treatment it gives FROM LAST on NTH_VALUE.
Oracle, maps to, Supported (this is where most IGNORE NULLS sample code on the internet comes from).

"Carry the last non-null value forward" is the query everyone eventually writes, and the portable shape does not use IGNORE NULLS at all. Number the non-null values into a group key, then take the group's first value:

grp stays constant across a run of nulls and increments on each real value, so every null row lands in the same group as the last real value before it, and FIRST_VALUE within that group is that value.
Rows before the first real tick get grp = 0 and stay null, which is the correct answer, there is nothing to carry forward yet.

Two more restrictions worth knowing before an interviewer asks: on sequel Server, LAG and LEAD accept OVER ( [partition_by_clause] order_by_clause ) and no frame clause, writing ROWS BETWEEN. inside a LAG is a syntax error, and ORDER BY is mandatory.
And the offset must be non-negative: "previous row" is LAG, never LEAD(x, -1).

In the real world: a pricing service materialised "current price per SKU" into a cache table with LAST_VALUE(price) OVER (PARTITION BY sku ORDER BY effective_from) and no frame clause.
Because the default frame ends at the current row, LAST_VALUE returned each row's own price,
so the cache was correct for every SKU with exactly one price row and wrong for every SKU that had ever been repriced, and since the loader wrote one cache row per SKU by taking whichever row came back first, "wrong" meant "the oldest price".
The checkout total came from the base table, so customers saw one price on the listing page and another at checkout, and only for products that had been discounted, which is the subset the marketing team was actively looking at.
Adding ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING fixed it in one line. The team then replaced the whole query with ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY sku ORDER BY effective_from DESC) filtered to = 1, because a pattern with no default-frame trap is worth more than a clever one-liner.

-- pause --
Aggregate windows: SUM or AVG or COUNT OVER.

Standard aggregates work as window functions when followed by OVER.

Three different windows:
running_total, sum from start of partition through current row (running sum).
avg_for_customer, average across all customer's orders (same value on every row of that customer).
orders_for_customer, count across all customer's orders.

Without ORDER BY in the window: the function applies to the entire partition (or whole result if no PARTITION). Result is the same on every row of the partition.

With ORDER BY (and default frame): the window goes from the first row of the partition through the current row, naturally produces "running" / cumulative aggregates.

DISTINCT is not available inside a window aggregate. COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) OVER (PARTITION BY region) looks obvious and is rejected almost everywhere.
sequel Server's OVER documentation lists it under Limitations: "You can't use the OVER clause with the DISTINCT aggregations." Postgres Q L raises ERROR: DISTINCT is not implemented for window functions. MySQL rejects it too.
Oracle is the notable engine that allows it, and only in the narrow form: with DISTINCT you may specify the partitioning clause and nothing else, no ORDER BY, no frame.

The portable substitute for "distinct count per partition, on every row" is a pair of dense ranks:

Each distinct value gets rank k counting up and rank (d − k + 1) counting down, so the two ranks sum to d + 1 for every row. Caveat: nulls receive a rank of their own, so filter or COALESCE them first if a null should not count as a value.
The alternative, aggregate in a C T E with a real GROUP BY and join back, is longer but reads better and gives the optimizer a normal aggregate to plan.

In the real world: an order-detail report showed each line item next to "total for this order", written as SUM(oi.line_total) OVER (PARTITION BY o.id) over a query that joined orders to order_items and to order_shipments.
Orders with two shipments had every line item duplicated by the join, so the window summed each line twice and the order total came out double, but only for split shipments, which was about one order in thirty and none of them in the test fixtures.
Finance caught it in a monthly reconciliation, six weeks in.
The mechanical lesson is that a window function is defined over the rows the FROM clause produced, and a fan-out join changes those rows before the window ever sees them;
the practical rule the team adopted was to aggregate each one-to-many relationship in its own C T E and join the aggregates, never to window over a query that joins two child tables at once.

-- pause --
PARTITION BY, group within window.

PARTITION BY divides the result into independent groups, like GROUP BY but without collapsing rows.

Each row keeps its data; the window function aggregates per partition.

PARTITION BY is the bridge between row-level info (each employee's salary) and group-level info (their department's average). One result row per input row, enriched with group context.

Multiple partition keys work too:

Median per group is where PARTITION BY and the engines part company. PERCENTILE_CONT / PERCENTILE_DISC exist in two mutually exclusive shapes and no engine offers both:

MySQL 8 has neither, its window-function list stops at CUME_DIST and PERCENT_RANK, so median there is a hand-rolled ROW_NUMBER / COUNT construction.
Porting a "median by group" query between sequel Server and Postgres Q L is therefore a rewrite, not a search-and-replace, and the sequel Server form is the one that surprises people: it computes the same value for every row of the partition and the DISTINCT is doing real work.

In the real world: a "median order value per region" tile was ported from a Postgres Q L prototype to the sequel Server production database.
The developer got PERCENTILE_CONT compiling by wrapping it in OVER (PARTITION BY region) and dropping the GROUP BY, which is the syntactically correct T sequel, and the endpoint then returned one row per order rather than one per region, tens of millions of rows,
all of them duplicates of six distinct values.
The A P I gateway killed the request on response size, so the symptom was a timeout on a tile that had worked in staging against a seeded database of a few thousand orders.
SELECT DISTINCT fixed the output; the better fix was to compute the six medians in a C T E and join, because it lets the plan aggregate rather than expand.

-- pause --
Window frame: ROWS versus RANGE.

The frame clause restricts which rows in the partition contribute to the window function. Default depends on whether ORDER BY is in the OVER clause.

With ORDER BY, default frame is:

"From start of partition through current row", produces running sums.

Without ORDER BY, frame is the whole partition.

You can override with explicit frame syntax:

Frame keywords:
UNBOUNDED PRECEDING, partition start.
n PRECEDING, n rows before current.
CURRENT ROW.
n FOLLOWING, n rows after current.
UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING, partition end.

ROWS counts physical rows; RANGE counts based on ORDER BY value (works for dates, numbers).

RANGE semantics handle ties differently from ROWS, both with the same ORDER BY value get the same window. For most queries, ROWS is the safer default.

The frame clause is where the dialects diverge most. Three separate features get lumped together as "RANGE support":

ROWS n PRECEDING or FOLLOWING, yes, yes (2012+), yes.
RANGE with an offset, RANGE BETWEEN 5 PRECEDING, RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '6 days' PRECEDING, yes (11+), no, yes.
GROUPS n PRECEDING (frame counted in peer groups), yes (11+), no, no.
EXCLUDE CURRENT ROW / GROUP / TIES / NO OTHERS, yes (11+), no, no.

sequel Server's restriction is explicit in the OVER documentation: "You can't use RANGE with PRECEDING or FOLLOWING." RANGE there is limited to UNBOUNDED PRECEDING, CURRENT ROW and UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING.
So the calendar-window idiom, "the last 7 days, however many rows that is", has no direct T sequel spelling. On sequel Server you either densify the date axis first (left-join a calendar table so every day has a row, then ROWS 6 PRECEDING is exactly 7 days) or fall back to a correlated APPLY.

EXCLUDE is the Postgres Q L-only piece that solves a real problem cleanly: "average of this customer's other orders". Note that EXCLUDE is part of the frame clause, so it needs an explicit frame unit, you cannot bolt it onto a bare PARTITION BY:

Elsewhere you write (SUM(total) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id) - total) / NULLIF(COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id) - 1, 0), correct, and a reminder of why the guard matters:
a customer with exactly one order has no "other" orders, and without NULLIF that is a divide-by-zero rather than a null.

RANGE is not just a semantic choice on sequel Server, it changes the physical plan.
In row mode, a windowed aggregate is implemented by a Window Spool operator that, in Microsoft's words, "expands each row into the set of rows that represents the window associated with it" and "stores all input rows in a hidden worktable in the tempdb database or in memory".
With ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING the engine takes a fast path and writes a fixed, tiny number of rows into an in-memory worktable per input row. With RANGE, it cannot know in advance how many peers share the current ordering value, so it uses the on-disk worktable in tempdb.
Itzik Ben-Gan's write-up of this puts the switch-over at 10,000 rows per underlying row, "if the number of rows that need to be written to the spool per underlying row could exceed 10,000, or if sequel Server cannot predict the number,
it will use the slower on-disk spool", and measured the RANGE version of a running total taking more than four times as long as the ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING version on his test data.
Treat that multiple as one measurement on one dataset, not a law; the mechanism (memory worktable versus tempdb worktable) is the part that transfers.

Which is why the advice "always write the frame explicitly" is stronger on sequel Server than anywhere else: omitting it gives you RANGE, and RANGE gives you the disk spool.
SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY d) and SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY d ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING) return identical results whenever d is unique, and only one of them is cheap.

In the real world: a settlement report on sequel Server computed a running balance with SUM(amount) OVER (PARTITION BY account_id ORDER BY posted_date), no frame clause, and posted_date was a date, so every transaction on the same day was a peer. Two things went wrong at once.
Semantically, all of a day's transactions got the same running balance (the end-of-day figure), so the statement PDF showed a balance that did not move down the page within a day and did not match the per-line arithmetic; accounting had been manually "correcting" it for months.
Physically, the default RANGE frame pushed the window spool onto the tempdb worktable, and once the table grew the report's tempdb usage started colliding with everything else on the instance.
Changing the frame to ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING and the ordering to posted_date, transaction_id fixed the arithmetic and the spool in the same edit, which is the useful thing to remember, because the two symptoms arrived on different tickets, filed by different teams, months apart.

-- pause --
Common patterns.

Top N per group, a near-universal pattern. Use ROW_NUMBER() and filter:

The window form reads best and is the right default when you need every group. When the driving set is small, a single customer's detail page, a filtered list of twenty accounts, the alternatives are usually the faster plan, because they can seek instead of sort:

The decision is cardinality, not taste. LATERAL / CROSS APPLY does n index seeks, one per driving row, so it wins when the driving set is small relative to the fact table and an index on (customer_id, created_at DESC) exists.
The window function reads and sorts the whole fact table once, so it wins when you genuinely need every group and there is no usable index. DISTINCT ON is Postgres Q L-only and can walk a matching index directly.

One optimizer detail worth knowing on Postgres Q L: since version 15 the planner can push a filter like WHERE rn <= 3 down into the WindowAgg node as a run condition, letting the executor stop emitting rows for a partition once the row number can no longer satisfy it.
The release note is terse, "Improve the performance of window functions that use row_number(), rank(), dense_rank() and count() ", but EXPLAIN shows it directly (Postgres Q L 15, 17 print the window as (?);
Postgres Q L 18's release notes list "Add details about window function arguments to EXPLAIN output", so newer output is more informative):

It applies only to those monotonic functions ( row_number, rank, dense_rank, count ), not to sum, min or max, and it saves the evaluation work, not the sort. There is no documented equivalent on sequel Server, which is part of why CROSS APPLY.
TOP (N) is the more common T sequel answer to top-N-per-group.

In the real world: a "last 3 orders per customer" panel on a customer-detail screen was written with the ROW_NUMBER C T E because that is the pattern everyone knows.
It ranked the whole orders table, hundreds of millions of rows by then, on a table whose clustered index was still the identity id from the original schema, and threw away all but three rows per customer, for a screen that displays exactly one customer.
The plan was a full clustered-index scan plus a sort that spilled, and the endpoint was the slowest in the service. Rewriting it as CROSS APPLY (SELECT TOP (3). ORDER BY created_at DESC) against a nonclustered index on (customer_id, created_at DESC) INCLUDE (total) turned it into three key lookups.
The window function was not the wrong tool in general, it was the wrong tool for a query whose driving set was one row, and the giveaway was in the plan the whole time: rows read in the millions, rows returned in single digits.

Running total:

Moving average (last 7 days):

Compare to previous (delta):

Percentile / Quartile:

First and most recent per group (without LIMIT):

Cumulative percentage of total:

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

-- pause --
Visualizing PARTITION BY + ORDER BY + frame.

Visualization is essential, sketch the frame for each row.

-- pause --
Ranking comparison on a tied dataset.

Pick:
ROW_NUMBER when you need a stable unique number (for example, picking "the" row for a tied group).
RANK for "Olympic medals" semantics (ties share rank; next has gap).
DENSE_RANK for compact ranking (ties share, no gap).
NTILE for percentile bucketing.

-- pause --
LAG or LEAD for time-series analysis.

Customer's purchase intervals, useful for churn modeling, "average days between orders."

The date arithmetic is the non-portable half.
The query is Postgres Q L: timestamp - timestamp yields an interval and EXTRACT(DAY FROM.) pulls the day component out of it, which also means it truncates the hours, and if created_at were a date the subtraction would yield a plain integer and EXTRACT would fail.
sequel Server writes DATEDIFF(DAY, LAG(created_at) OVER (.), created_at); MySQL writes DATEDIFF(created_at, LAG(created_at) OVER (.)). Same window function, three different scalar expressions around it.

-- pause --
Top-3 per group, the canonical pattern.

Result: top 3 best-selling products per category. The C T E ranks; the outer SELECT filters.

If you want ties (Olympic semantics), use RANK() instead of ROW_NUMBER(). If you want "top 3 distinct values" (no gaps), DENSE_RANK().

-- pause --
Moving average, 7-day rolling.

The window slides as the row advances. For datasets with gaps in dates, use RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '6 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW instead of ROWS, on Postgres Q L 11+ or MySQL 8.
On sequel Server that syntax does not exist; join a calendar table so every day has a row, and then ROWS 6 PRECEDING is genuinely 7 days.

In the real world: an ops dashboard tracked a 7-day rolling error rate with ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW over a table that only had a row for days on which at least one error occurred.
During a quiet fortnight the "7-day window" silently stretched across a month, so the rolling average kept including a bad day from three weeks earlier and the tile stayed amber long after the incident was resolved.
Nobody trusted it, so nobody looked at it, so a genuine regression went unnoticed for two days.
The fix was to generate the date axis ( generate_series on Postgres Q L, a calendar dimension table on sequel Server) and left-join the counts onto it, which made the window mean seven days again and made the zero-error days visible as zeros rather than as absences.
Sparse fact tables and ROWS frames do not mix, and the failure is silent, the query never errors, it just answers a different question.

-- pause --
Percent of total.

SUM(sales) OVER () is total across all products (same value on every row). SUM(sales) OVER (PARTITION BY category) is total within the category.

-- pause --
Gaps and islands, bonus pattern.

A classic interview problem: identify consecutive sequences in time-stamped data.

The trick: subtract the row number (incrementing by 1) from the date, consecutive days collapse to the same grp value; gaps create new grp values. Then group by grp to find the runs.

The date arithmetic is Postgres Q L.
sequel Server writes DATEADD(DAY, -ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY user_id ORDER BY login_date), login_date);
MySQL writes DATE_SUB(login_date, INTERVAL rn DAY), easiest to build by numbering the rows in an inner query and subtracting in the next, so the interval operand stays a plain column reference.
And the pattern only works when the input has at most one row per user per day, duplicate days break the one-to-one correspondence between the date step and the row-number step, so de-duplicate (or DENSE_RANK instead of ROW_NUMBER ) first.

In the real world: a subscription business paid a retention bonus based on "longest unbroken run of active months", computed with exactly this gaps-and-islands pattern over a subscription_months table. The table turned out to contain two rows for any month in which a customer changed plan mid-month.
Because ROW_NUMBER incremented twice while the month incremented once, the grp key changed inside what was really a continuous run, and every plan upgrade looked like a churn-and-return. The customers penalised were precisely the ones who had upgraded, the best customers.
It survived a quarter because the numbers were plausible and nobody reconciled a single account by hand. The fix was one line, SELECT DISTINCT user_id, month in the inner query, and the lesson was that gaps-and-islands assumes a grain it never states: one row per entity per step.
Assert that grain before trusting the answer.

-- pause --
Window function execution order.

QUALIFY is the cleanest syntax but isn't in the sequel standard, it began as a Teradata extension. None of sequel Server, Postgres Q L or MySQL support it, so in a dot NET shop the C T E form is the one you will actually write.

One more consequence of the ordering: DISTINCT runs after the window functions. SELECT DISTINCT customer_id, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY id) FROM orders never collapses anything, because the row number makes every row unique before DISTINCT looks at them.
The sequel Server PERCENTILE_CONT idiom earlier is the one case where that ordering is exactly what you want.

-- pause --
Reading a window-function execution plan.

Two engines, two vocabularies for the same work. Query: SUM(total) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY created_at ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING).

The operators, in Microsoft's own descriptions: Segment "divides the input set into segments based on the value of one or more columns. The input is sorted by these columns";
Window Spool "expands each row into the set of rows that represents the window associated with it" and "stores all input rows in a hidden worktable in the tempdb database or in memory";
Sequence Project "adds columns to perform computations over an ordered set", that is the operator that appears instead of Window Spool for ROW_NUMBER, RANK and DENSE_RANK, which have no frame and so need no window spool.
( NTILE is the exception among the ranking functions: it needs the partition's row count before it can assign a bucket, so its plan picks up a spool and a nested loop to supply that count.) Seeing Window Spool at all tells you the query has a frame;
seeing Segment + Sequence Project alone tells you it is only ranking.

Three things to look for when a window query is slow:

A Sort under the window operator. That is the whole cost on large inputs, and it is the one thing an index can remove.
A spill. Postgres Q L: Sort Method: external merge Disk:. in EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS). sequel Server: a spill warning on the Sort, and an actual row count far the estimate.
Microsoft's own mitigations are the mundane ones, statistics that cover the partitioning and ordering columns, memory grant feedback (compatibility level 140+), and reducing the input with WHERE.
Row mode where batch mode was possible. On sequel Server the Window Aggregate operator can run in batch mode, which the documentation says "might run faster. than in row mode".
It becomes available when the query touches a columnstore index, or, since sequel Server 2019 (15.x), at database compatibility level 150 or higher, on plain rowstore heaps and B-trees.
You cannot force it; you check the operator's Actual Execution Mode property in the actual plan and see whether it says Batch.

The index that removes the sort has a name in Itzik Ben-Gan's material: the POC index, Partitioning, Ordering, Covering.
Key columns are the PARTITION BY columns first, then the ORDER BY columns in the same direction the window asks for; everything else the query touches goes in INCLUDE so the index covers the query without widening the key. Both sequel Server and Postgres Q L 11+ support INCLUDE on a B-tree index.
Microsoft's OVER documentation states the rule without the acronym:
"the position of the key columns in the new nonclustered index must match the PARTITION BY columns followed by the ORDER BY columns. If an ORDER BY clause is present, the order of the index key columns must also match the order specified in the ORDER BY clause."

Direction matters and is the detail people miss.
A backward index read reverses every key column at once, never one of them, so an index on (created_at) serves an unpartitioned ORDER BY created_at DESC, but nothing serves a window whose ordering mixes directions, like ORDER BY region ASC, revenue DESC,
except an index declared so that it can be read straight through or reversed as a whole, for example
(region ASC, revenue DESC).
When a PARTITION BY is combined with a DESC ordering, read the plan rather than assuming: whether the optimizer will take an ascending index backwards to serve it is engine- and version-specific, and the index that matches the window's declared directions exactly always works.

And the count that matters for a query with many OVER clauses is the number of distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pairs, not the number of window functions. Five windows sharing one key cost one sort. Two windows with unrelated keys cost two.
(When one window's ordering is a prefix of another's, the planner may serve both from a single sort, check the plan rather than counting on it.)

In the real world: a month-end analytics query on sequel Server carried eleven OVER clauses across four different partition or order combinations, so four sorts of a large fact table.
The cardinality estimate on the partitioning column was stale, the memory grant was sized for a fraction of the real row count, and every one of those sorts spilled to tempdb.
The report itself completed, slowly, and it looked unremarkable in the logs, but while it ran, tempdb was saturated and other people's queries were the ones that failed: anything needing a sort, a hash, or a version store.
The on-call engineer spent the first hour looking at the failing O L T P queries, which were innocent. What actually found it was reading the actual execution plan and seeing four spill warnings with actual row counts orders of magnitude estimated.
Three changes stuck: updated statistics on the partitioning and ordering columns, consolidating the eleven windows onto two shared window definitions, and moving the job to a read-only replica. Two of those three came straight out of Microsoft's own list of spill mitigations.

-- pause --
Why a sliding frame is cheap on one column type and expensive on another (Postgres Q L).

A frame with a moving start, ROWS BETWEEN 29 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, is the case where the aggregate has to forget rows as well as remember them.
Postgres Q L handles this with what the manual calls moving-aggregate mode: an aggregate can supply an inverse transition function that removes a row's contribution from the running state.
With one, "the run time is only proportional to the number of input rows"; without one, "the window function mechanism must recalculate the aggregate from scratch each time the frame starting point moves", giving run time "proportional to the number of input rows times the average frame length".

The catch is arithmetic, not implementation. The manual names sum over float4 / float8 as the aggregate for which "adding an inverse transition function seems easy at first, yet where this requirement cannot be met", and shows exactly why with a deliberately unsafe user-defined aggregate:

So the practical consequence for a 30-day moving sum over a money column: on numeric (or the integer types) the built-in sum ships an inverse transition function and the sliding frame is a linear pass; on float8 it deliberately does not, so the engine rebuilds each window.
That is a second, independent reason to store money as numeric / decimal rather than float, the first being that float sums are not reproducible when the addition order changes.
Check rather than assume for any other aggregate: the catalog column pg_aggregate.aggminvtransfn holds the "inverse transition function for moving-aggregate mode (zero if none)", so a zero there means every frame move is a rebuild.

sequel Server has no user-visible equivalent knob; the analogous lever there is the frame you write, since ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING is the shape that gets the in-memory spool fast path.

-- pause --
Version gates and dialect support.

Window functions at all, 8.4, ranking functions in 2005; LAG / LEAD / FIRST_VALUE, aggregate ORDER BY, and frames in 2012 (11.x), 8.0 (MariaDB: 10.2).
ROWS frame, yes, 2012+, yes.
RANGE with offset / INTERVAL, 11+, no, documented limitation, still current, yes.
GROUPS frame mode, 11+, no, no.
EXCLUDE frame exclusion, 11+, no, no.
Named WINDOW clause, yes, 2022 (16.x), compat level 160, 8.0.
IGNORE NULLS, not implemented (18), 2022 (16.x), parsed, then errors.
FILTER (WHERE. ) on a window aggregate, yes, no, use CASE, no, use CASE.
DISTINCT inside a window aggregate, no, no (documented limitation), no.
PERCENTILE_CONT, aggregate only ( WITHIN GROUP, no OVER ), window only ( OVER required), absent.
QUALIFY, no, no, no.
NTH_VALUE, yes ( FROM FIRST only), no, yes ( FROM FIRST only).

The row that catches most people moving between a Postgres Q L prototype and a sequel Server production database is RANGE with an offset, because the query is valid, readable, and simply will not parse on the other side.

In the real world: a reporting library shared between two products was written against Postgres Q L and used RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '29 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW for every rolling metric, the correct choice there, because the source table skips days with no activity.
When the second product's customer insisted on sequel Server, that clause did not degrade or behave differently; it failed to compile, on every rolling metric in the library, on the first run.
The port took a fortnight it had not been budgeted: each metric had to be joined to a calendar dimension so that every day had a row, after which ROWS 29 PRECEDING covered exactly the 30 days it was supposed to.
The team's retrospective note was worth more than the fix, "supports window functions" had been treated as a single checkbox during the platform assessment, when the frame clause,
the null-treatment clause and the percentile functions are three separate checkboxes and the engines score differently on each.

-- pause --
Window functions from dot NET.

There is no link translation for OVER in E F Core. The tracking issue, dotnet or efcore#12747 "Support sequel window functions", is open and sitting in the Backlog milestone with no assignee, so as of E F Core 10 the options are:

What you must not do is the shape that looks like link working: pulling the group into memory ( .ToList() then .GroupBy(.).Select(g goes to g.OrderByDescending(.).Take(3)) ) turns one indexable query into a full table read.
E F Core 3.0 onward throws on queries it cannot translate rather than silently evaluating them client-side, so the failure mode today is usually an explicit exception, but a .ToList() placed before the grouping defeats that protection, because from EF's point of view the query ended there.

Two related notes. ROW_NUMBER -based paging is not the same as Skip / Take: EF emits OFFSET. FETCH NEXT (sequel Server 2012+, Postgres Q L LIMIT or OFFSET ), and both that and a ROW_NUMBER filter must still produce and discard every row before the offset, so deep pages get linearly worse.
Keyset pagination, on Postgres Q L or MySQL, WHERE (created_at, id) < (@last Date, @last Id) ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC LIMIT 20, is the fix, and it needs no window function at all.
T sequel has no row-value comparison, so the same predicate there is spelled out longhand ( WHERE created_at < @last Date OR (created_at = @last Date AND id < @last Id) ) with OFFSET 0 ROWS FETCH NEXT 20 ROWS ONLY or TOP (20).
And when you do write raw window sequel, parameterise it: string-concatenating a PARTITION BY column name from user input is a sequel injection hole that no SqlQuery interpolation will catch, because identifiers cannot be parameterised.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

Filtering on a window function in WHERE. Window functions evaluate after WHERE. Use a C T E or subquery; or QUALIFY if your dialect supports it.
LAST_VALUE returns current row's value. Default frame ends at CURRENT ROW. Override with ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING to get the actual last.
Assuming RANGE with an offset is portable. It is not, and it does not degrade gracefully, sequel Server rejects RANGE n PRECEDING / RANGE INTERVAL. PRECEDING outright, so the query fails to compile rather than falling back to ROWS.
Postgres Q L 11+ and MySQL 8 support it; Postgres Q L additionally requires exactly one ORDER BY column and an offset type it can add to it (an interval for date or timestamp ordering).
ROW_NUMBER ties broken arbitrarily. If multiple rows have the same ORDER BY value, which one gets the lower number is undefined, not "storage order", not stable across runs. Add tie-breaker columns until the ordering is total, especially when the row number decides which row gets deleted.
PARTITION BY confused with GROUP BY. GROUP BY collapses rows; PARTITION BY doesn't. Both can coexist in one query.
No ORDER BY in window for cumulative aggregates. SUM(x) OVER (PARTITION BY y) (no ORDER BY) computes the same value on every row of the partition. Add ORDER BY for running totals.
Filtering window functions versus ranking. WHERE row_number = 1 doesn't work directly. Use C T E; understand window functions execute mid-pipeline.
Ignoring NULL behavior in LAG. LAG(x) returns NULL on the first row of partition. LAG(x, 1, 0) provides a default.
Frame clause confusion. ROWS is rows physical; RANGE is value-based. Stick to ROWS unless you specifically need value-based (for example, date ranges with gaps).
Sequence problems with non-unique ORDER BY. Two rows tied; ROW_NUMBER picks one arbitrarily. If reproducibility matters, ORDER BY all distinguishing columns.
Performance: window functions over huge datasets. There is no hash-based window operator, each distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pair needs its input sorted, and on a large table that sort is the whole cost.
A POC index (partition keys, then order keys in the matching direction, covering the rest) removes it; nothing else does.
Mixing aggregates and window functions. SUM(x) is a regular aggregate (collapses); SUM(x) OVER () is a window. Easy to typo and miss the OVER clause.
Relying on the window's ORDER BY to order the output. It orders the computation. The result set order is only guaranteed by a query-level ORDER BY; the coincidence holds until the plan goes parallel or an index removes the sort.
Forgetting that WHERE shrinks the window's population. SUM(x) OVER () totals the rows that survived the filter, not the table. Percent-of-total tiles silently re-base themselves when someone adds a filter to the screen.
Windowing over a fan-out join. A join to two child tables multiplies rows before the window sees them, so SUM(child.amount) OVER (PARTITION BY parent.id) double-counts. Aggregate each child relationship in its own C T E and join the aggregates.
Omitting the frame on sequel Server. The default is RANGE, which forces the on-disk tempdb worktable for the Window Spool; ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING gets the in-memory fast path and, when the ordering column is unique, the identical answer.
COUNT(DISTINCT x) OVER (.). Rejected by sequel Server (documented limitation), Postgres Q L and MySQL. Use the two- DENSE_RANK trick or a GROUP BY C T E joined back.
Assuming IGNORE NULLS exists. sequel Server has it from 2022; Postgres Q L does not implement it at all as of 18; MySQL parses it and then errors. Write the COUNT(col) OVER (.) grouping trick if the query has to run on more than one engine.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Window functions = aggregate or value functions over a window of rows, without collapsing. Each row keeps its identity.
OVER (.) defines the window: PARTITION BY (group), ORDER BY (sequence within group), frame clause (range of rows).
Ranking: ROW_NUMBER (unique), RANK (ties + gap), DENSE_RANK (ties, no gap), NTILE(n) (n buckets).
Value: LAG / LEAD (previous / next row), FIRST_VALUE / LAST_VALUE (window edges).
Aggregate windows: SUM or AVG or COUNT or MIN or MAX OVER (.). With ORDER BY, default frame produces running aggregates.
Frame: ROWS BETWEEN N PRECEDING AND M FOLLOWING for sliding windows.
Pattern: top N per group, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY. ORDER BY.) then filter rn <= N in C T E. For top-1 with a small driving set, LATERAL / CROSS APPLY against an index usually beats it.
Window functions execute after WHERE, filter on them via C T E or QUALIFY. That also means the window's population is the post-filter row set, and that the window's ORDER BY does not order the result.
Cost model: one sort per distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pair. A POC index, partition columns, then order columns in the matching direction, covering the rest, removes the sort.
Engine fault lines to name unprompted: RANGE with an offset (no sequel Server), GROUPS and EXCLUDE (Postgres Q L only), IGNORE NULLS (sequel Server 2022+, not Postgres Q L), FILTER (Postgres Q L only), PERCENTILE_CONT (window-only on sequel Server, aggregate-only on Postgres Q L, absent in MySQL),
DISTINCT in a window aggregate (nowhere), QUALIFY (none of the three).

Expected interview questions:

"Find the top 3 highest-paid employees per department.", ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY department ORDER BY salary DESC) in a C T E, filter rn <= 3.
" ROW_NUMBER versus RANK versus DENSE_RANK ?", ROW_NUMBER unique 1,2,3,.; RANK ties same + gap (1,1,3); DENSE_RANK ties same + no gap (1,1,2).
"Calculate running total of monthly sales.", SUM(sales) OVER (ORDER BY month). Default frame is unbounded preceding to current row.
"7-day moving average.", AVG(x) OVER (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW).
"Find each customer's previous order date.", LAG(created_at) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY created_at).
"Find Nth highest salary using window functions.", DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY salary DESC) in C T E; filter where rank = N.
"Why doesn't WHERE row_number > 5 work?", Window functions execute after WHERE. Use a C T E: WITH ranked AS (SELECT, ROW_NUMBER() OVER. FROM.) SELECT FROM ranked WHERE row_number > 5;.
"Does the ORDER BY inside OVER order my result set?", No. It orders the computation. Add a query-level ORDER BY if the caller needs an order; the rows often arrive in window order because of the sort in the plan, and that stops being true the moment the plan changes.
"What index would make this window query fast?", Partition columns first, then order columns in the same direction, covering the rest, the POC index. It converts Sort to WindowAgg into Index Scan to WindowAgg. Count distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pairs to know how many sorts you are paying for.
"You wrote SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY d) with no frame. What did you actually get?", RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, meaning all peers sharing the current d value get the same total.
If d is a date and several rows share a day, that is usually a bug; on sequel Server it is also the slow spool path. Write ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING.
"Median salary per department.", Engine-dependent, and saying so is the answer. sequel Server: SELECT DISTINCT department, PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY salary) OVER (PARTITION BY department).
Postgres Q L: percentile_cont(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY salary) with GROUP BY department and no OVER. MySQL 8: neither exists.
"How would you do this in E F Core?", You wouldn't, in link: there is no OVER translation ( dotnet or efcore#12747, still open). Raw sequel via Database.SqlQuery, or a view / table-valued function mapped with ToView / HasDbFunction. And do not "solve" it by materialising the group in memory first.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, OVER clause anatomy.

Q: What are the three optional clauses inside OVER (.) and what does each one control?-- think --

A: PARTITION BY splits rows into independent windows by key (like GROUP BY but without collapsing rows). ORDER BY sequences rows inside each partition (and implicitly engages a default frame). The frame clause ( ROWS / RANGE / GROUPS BETWEEN. AND.
) restricts which rows in the partition feed the function for the current row.

Cross-Q: If I write SUM(x) OVER () with completely empty parentheses, what window does each row see?-- think --

A: The whole result set, no partitioning, no ordering, no frame restriction. Every row gets the same grand total. It's the cheapest window: the engine computes the aggregate once and broadcasts it. Useful for "% of overall total" without a self-join.

Cross-Q²: Can two window functions in one SELECT share a window definition without retyping it?-- think --

A: Yes, use the named WINDOW clause (standard sequel): SELECT., SUM(x) OVER w, AVG(x) OVER w FROM t WINDOW w AS (PARTITION BY g ORDER BY d).
Supported by Postgres Q L, MySQL 8, Oracle, and sequel Server from 2022 (16.x), where it additionally requires database compatibility level 160, so a 2022 instance left at level 150 rejects it.
The optimizer can also collapse identical inline definitions into a single sort, but the explicit WINDOW clause makes the intent obvious and prevents drift if you tweak the definition.
You can extend a named window in the OVER clause ( OVER (w ROWS BETWEEN 1 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) ) but you can't redefine a component it already specifies.

-- pause --
Drill 2, PARTITION BY versus GROUP BY.

Q: I've already got GROUP BY department doing department totals. Why would I ever switch to PARTITION BY department ?-- think --

A: GROUP BY collapses every employee in a department to one output row, you lose per-employee detail. PARTITION BY keeps every employee row and adds the department aggregate as an extra column.
You want it whenever you need both row-level and group-level data side by side ("show each employee with their department's average").

Cross-Q: Can I have GROUP BY and PARTITION BY in the same query?-- think --

A: Yes. GROUP BY runs first (collapsing rows); window functions then run on the post-aggregation rows. Example: SELECT department, COUNT() AS headcount, SUM(COUNT()) OVER () AS company_total FROM employees GROUP BY department.
Each row is one department, and the window adds the company-wide total to every row.

Cross-Q²: What runs first inside the engine: the WHERE, the GROUP BY, or the PARTITION BY ?-- think --

A: FROM to WHERE to GROUP BY to HAVING to window functions to DISTINCT to ORDER BY to LIMIT. Window functions run after GROUP BY and HAVING, which is why you can't reference a window alias in WHERE or HAVING, they don't exist yet.
You filter on window output via a C T E or subquery or QUALIFY (BigQuery or Snowflake or DuckDB).

-- pause --
Drill 3, ROW_NUMBER versus RANK versus DENSE_RANK on ties.

Q: Three employees earn the same top salary. How does each ranking function number them?-- think --

A: ROW_NUMBER gives 1, 2, 3, ties broken arbitrarily (or by any secondary ORDER BY ). RANK gives 1, 1, 1, then 4 for the next (gap = number of tied rows). DENSE_RANK gives 1, 1, 1, then 2 (no gap, compact sequence).

Cross-Q: I need exactly the top 5 paid employees, no more, no less. Which function and why?-- think --

A: ROW_NUMBER. RANK could return 7 rows if there's a three-way tie at rank 5; DENSE_RANK could return more if multiple groups share ranks. ROW_NUMBER is deterministic-cardinality, exactly N rows when filtered WHERE rn <= 5.
The caveat: which member of a tie you keep is undefined unless you add a tie-breaker column to the ORDER BY.

Cross-Q²: My CTO wants "everyone tied with the top earner included." Now which function?-- think --

A: RANK or DENSE_RANK, filtered WHERE rank = 1. Both put every top-tied row at rank 1; you keep all of them.
Choose RANK if you also want gap-aware semantics elsewhere ("everyone in the top 3 ranks" including ties pushing the bottom rank past 3, Olympic medals); choose DENSE_RANK for compact "top 3 distinct salaries" semantics.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Frame specification ROWS versus RANGE versus GROUPS.

Q: What's the difference between ROWS BETWEEN 2 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW and RANGE BETWEEN 2 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW ?-- think --

A: ROWS counts physical rows, exactly the two rows before the current one plus the current row. RANGE counts by value relative to the ORDER BY column, every row whose ordering value is within 2 of the current row's value.
With dates: ROWS 6 PRECEDING gives the last 7 rows; RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '6 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW gives the last 7 calendar days regardless of how many rows fall in that range.

Cross-Q: When does ROWS and RANGE give different answers on the same dataset?-- think --

A: Whenever the ORDER BY column has duplicates, or when rows are unevenly distributed across the ordering values. With ties, RANGE BETWEEN. AND CURRENT ROW includes all rows that share the current row's ordering value (peer rows), while ROWS only includes the physical N preceding rows.
For running totals on a column with duplicates, RANGE produces matching running totals for tied rows; ROWS doesn't.

Cross-Q²: What does GROUPS mode do, and which engines support it?-- think --

A: GROUPS BETWEEN N PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW counts in peer groups, rows sharing the same ORDER BY value count as one "group." GROUPS 1 PRECEDING means "the current peer group plus the previous peer group." Supported in Postgres Q L 11+ and sequel standard; sequel Server doesn't support GROUPS.
Use it when you want frame boundaries in "distinct ordering values" rather than physical rows or interval ranges.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Default frame trap.

Q: If I write SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY d) without any frame clause, what frame does the engine assume?-- think --

A: RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, from the start of the partition through the current row (including peer ties on the ordering column). This produces running totals, which is usually what people want.

Cross-Q: What if I drop the ORDER BY entirely, SUM(x) OVER () ?-- think --

A: With no ORDER BY, there's no frame concept; the function applies to the entire partition (or whole result set if no PARTITION BY ). Every row gets the same value. It's the right form for "% of total" or "row's share of department total."

Cross-Q²: Why does ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW sometimes outperform the default RANGE equivalent?-- think --

A: RANGE requires the engine to detect peer ties on the ORDER BY value (so all peers get the same aggregate), which adds bookkeeping. ROWS is purely positional, increment a running sum row by row, no peer logic.
On large partitions with unique ORDER BY values, the results are identical but ROWS is faster and uses less memory. Many teams default to explicit ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW for that reason.

-- pause --
Drill 6, LAG or LEAD for time-series gaps.

Q: I want days-between-orders per customer. Walk me through the query.-- think --

A: LAG(created_at) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY created_at) returns the previous order's date for the same customer. Subtract: created_at - LAG(created_at) OVER (.). First order in each partition gets NULL because there's no previous row.

Cross-Q: How do I find customers whose last order is more than 90 days ago without a self-join?-- think --

A: LEAD peeking at the next order identifies it, rows where LEAD(created_at) is NULL are the customer's most recent order.
But you cannot filter on that in WHERE, for the same reason as every other window function, so the predicate goes in an outer query:
WITH t AS (SELECT customer_id, created_at, LEAD(created_at) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY created_at) AS next_order FROM orders) SELECT * FROM t WHERE next_order IS NULL AND created_at < NOW() - INTERVAL '90 days'.
MAX(created_at) OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id) works the same way and needs the same wrapper. Either avoids a self-join and runs in one pass. (If the question is only "which customers", a plain GROUP BY customer_id HAVING MAX(created_at) <. is simpler still, no window needed.)

Cross-Q²: What does the third parameter of LAG(col, offset, default) do, and why does it matter for arithmetic?-- think --

A: It's the value returned when the offset would fall outside the partition (instead of NULL ). LAG(total, 1, 0) returns 0 instead of NULL for the first row, which means total - LAG(total, 1, 0) produces the first row's total instead of NULL.
Critical for queries where downstream consumers (BI tools, reports) don't handle NULL arithmetic gracefully. Without the default, every arithmetic expression with a NULL operand returns NULL.

-- pause --
Drill 7, FIRST_VALUE / LAST_VALUE frame trap.

Q: Why does LAST_VALUE(total) OVER (PARTITION BY c ORDER BY d) keep returning the current row's value instead of the last value in the partition?-- think --

A: The default frame with ORDER BY is RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW. "Last value" in that frame is the current row, because the frame ends there. To get the actual partition-end value, override the frame: ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING.

Cross-Q: Does FIRST_VALUE have the same problem?-- think --

A: No, because the default frame starts at UNBOUNDED PRECEDING. The first value in [start, current] is always the partition's first row, regardless of where the current row sits. FIRST_VALUE "just works" with the default frame; LAST_VALUE is the one that needs explicit framing.

Cross-Q²: Is there a substitute pattern that avoids the frame issue entirely?-- think --

A: Yes, NTH_VALUE with the appropriate frame,
or MAX(.) OVER (PARTITION BY.) if "last" means "largest by some ordering column" rather than "physically last in the sequence." Many teams prefer MAX or MIN OVER (PARTITION BY.) precisely because the frame trap doesn't apply, there's no ordering inside the OVER,
so the aggregate runs across the whole partition by default.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Running totals + moving averages.

Q: Show me a single query that returns both a running total and a 7-row moving average.-- think --

A: SELECT day, x, SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY day) AS running, AVG(x) OVER (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) AS ma7 FROM t. The first window uses default frame (unbounded preceding to current = running total); the second uses an explicit sliding 7-row frame.

Cross-Q: How does the engine execute that, one sort or two?-- think --

A: One sort. The optimizer recognizes both window functions share the same ORDER BY (and any compatible PARTITION BY ) and reuses the sorted input for both aggregates.
You can verify in EXPLAIN ANALYZE, single Sort node feeding a WindowAgg operator (or two stacked WindowAgg nodes with no intermediate sort).

Cross-Q²: If I add a third window with a different ORDER BY, what changes in the plan?-- think --

A: A second sort node appears. Each distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pair requires its own sort; different framings of the same key share one. This is the main performance cost of stacking many window functions: count the distinct sort keys, not the number of OVER clauses.
Indexes that pre-sort on the partition+order keys eliminate one or more of these sorts.

-- pause --
Drill 9, NTILE bucketing.

Q: What does NTILE(4) do?-- think --

A: Divides the partition into 4 roughly-equal buckets numbered 1.4 by the ORDER BY sequence. Bucket 1 holds the lowest 25% (or highest if you ORDER BY. DESC ); bucket 4 holds the top 25%.
If the partition has 103 rows, three buckets get 26 rows and one gets 25, the extra rows go to the lower-numbered buckets.

Cross-Q: How does NTILE(100) differ from PERCENT_RANK ?-- think --

A: NTILE(100) is bucket assignment, discrete integers 1.100 with ties broken arbitrarily; rows close to bucket boundaries can fall into different buckets despite near-identical values. PERCENT_RANK is continuous percentile position, a value in [0, 1] computed as (rank - 1) / (total_rows - 1).
For "top 1% customers," NTILE(100) = 100 is roughly equivalent but PERCENT_RANK >= 0.99 is more precise on ties.

Cross-Q²: When does NTILE produce uneven buckets in a way that surprises users?-- think --

A: When the partition has fewer rows than the bucket count: NTILE(10) on 7 rows gives one row per bucket 1-7 and empty buckets 8-10, there's no bucket 8 or 9 or 10 in the output at all.
Also when there are massive ties at a bucket boundary: rows with identical ordering values can split across two buckets despite being equal. Document the tie-break behavior or add a secondary ORDER BY for determinism.

-- pause --
Drill 10, PERCENT_RANK and CUME_DIST.

Q: What's the formula for PERCENT_RANK and how does it differ from CUME_DIST ?-- think --

A: PERCENT_RANK = (rank - 1) / (N - 1) where rank is the row's rank (with ties) and N is the partition size; values range [0, 1]. CUME_DIST is the cumulative distribution: fraction of rows with value 0 (always at least 1 or N ); the highest row has both = 1.

Cross-Q: Which one matches "what percentile is this customer's spend"?-- think --

A: CUME_DIST, "what fraction of customers spent the same or less than me?" matches the intuition of percentile.
PERCENT_RANK matches "where do I sit between min and max on a 0-to-1 scale, by rank position." For business-facing percentile metrics, CUME_DIST is usually the right pick; PERCENT_RANK is often confused with CUME_DIST and reported incorrectly.

Cross-Q²: How do they treat ties differently?-- think --

A: PERCENT_RANK uses RANK() semantics, tied rows share the same percent rank value. CUME_DIST uses peer-group semantics, tied rows share the higher cumulative distribution value (because all peers count as "the same or less").
On a partition with three tied lowest values, all three get PERCENT_RANK = 0 (they're rank 1) but CUME_DIST = 3 or N (three rows at or below).

-- pause --
Drill 11, Top-N per group with ROW_NUMBER.

Q: How do I get the top 3 orders per customer by total?-- think --

A: C T E pattern: WITH ranked AS (SELECT, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY total DESC) AS rn FROM orders) SELECT FROM ranked WHERE rn <= 3. Window numbers each customer's orders 1.N by descending total; outer query keeps the top 3.

Cross-Q: How would you do this without a window function, and what's the performance penalty?-- think --

A: Correlated subquery: SELECT FROM orders o WHERE (SELECT COUNT() FROM orders o2 WHERE o2.customer_id = o.customer_id AND o2.total > o.total) < 3.
Each row triggers a re-scan of that customer's orders, so the work is quadratic in the partition size: a customer with 1,000 orders costs about 10⁶ comparisons on its own, and that repeats per customer. The window function sorts once and makes a single pass, O(N log N) overall.
Quote the complexity, not a speed-up multiple: the ratio depends entirely on how large the partitions are, and for tiny partitions the two are indistinguishable.

Cross-Q²: How would RANK change the result, and when does that matter?-- think --

A: RANK returns all rows tied at rank at most 3, which could be 5+ rows for a customer with multiple identical totals at the top. Use RANK when "top 3" means "everyone tied with the top 3 values"; use ROW_NUMBER when you need exactly 3 rows per customer.
For reports where customers care about "my best 3 orders," ROW_NUMBER matches user intuition; for fairness ("all top performers count"), RANK / DENSE_RANK.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Sliding window aggregates.

Q: Compute a 30-day rolling sum of daily revenue with one query.-- think --

A: SELECT day, daily_revenue, SUM(daily_revenue) OVER (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 29 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) AS rolling_30 FROM daily_revenue. The frame slides one row per output row. First 29 rows have partial windows (fewer than 30 rows preceding).
Use RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '29 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW for calendar-day windows when there are gaps in the dates.

Cross-Q: Why might ROWS give wrong answers for sparse data?-- think --

A: ROWS 29 PRECEDING counts physical rows, ignoring calendar gaps. If your daily_revenue table is missing weekends, "30 rows back" spans 42 calendar days, not 30.
For a true 30-day rolling sum on Postgres Q L 11+ or MySQL 8, use RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '29 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, the engine uses the ORDER BY value (the date) to compute the window; Postgres Q L requires a single ORDER BY column of a type it can add the offset to.
sequel Server has no such form, RANGE there accepts only UNBOUNDED and CURRENT ROW, so the T sequel answer is to left-join a calendar table first so every day has a row, after which ROWS 29 PRECEDING means exactly 30 days again.

Cross-Q²: How do I handle the "warm-up" period where the window has fewer than 30 days?-- think --

A: Two clean options. (1) Return the partial sum, the default behaviour, correct if the consumer understands it.
(2) Suppress incomplete windows with a CASE over a second window function counting the frame: CASE WHEN COUNT(*) OVER (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 29 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) < 30 THEN NULL ELSE SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 29 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) END.
Both windows must carry the same frame or the count describes a different set of rows than the sum. Choose based on whether downstream consumers can interpret partial windows or need uniform 30-day data.

-- pause --
Drill 13, FILTER clause (Postgres).

Q: What does Postgres's FILTER (WHERE.) do to a window aggregate?-- think --

A: Restricts which rows in the frame contribute to the aggregate without restricting which rows appear in the output.
SUM(amount) FILTER (WHERE status = 'paid') OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id) sums only paid amounts per customer, but every row of the customer (paid or unpaid) still gets the aggregate. It's a cleaner replacement for SUM(CASE WHEN status='paid' THEN amount ELSE 0 END) OVER (.).

Cross-Q: Which engines support FILTER on window functions?-- think --

A: Standard sequel (sequel:2003), supported by Postgres Q L, SQLite 3.30+, and DuckDB. sequel Server and MySQL don't, you fall back to CASE WHEN. THEN. END inside the aggregate.
The portable form is the CASE version; the FILTER form is cleaner and the optimizer can sometimes skip non-matching rows entirely.

Cross-Q²: Does FILTER affect the frame, the partition, or just the aggregation function?-- think --

A: Only the aggregation, the frame and partition are unchanged. The function sees the same rows; it just ignores ones that don't match the FILTER predicate when computing the result. This means COUNT() FILTER (WHERE.) doesn't affect rolling-window denominators unless you specifically design it to.
For a ratio like "paid fraction over a 7-day window", both halves need their own OVER with the same window:
1.0 COUNT() FILTER (WHERE status = 'paid') OVER w / NULLIF(COUNT() OVER w, 0) with WINDOW w AS (ORDER BY day ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW), which is also the tidiest argument for the named WINDOW clause, since a frame typed twice is a frame that will drift.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Window versus aggregate in one query.

Q: Can I use both GROUP BY (regular aggregate) and a window function in the same SELECT ?-- think --

A: Yes. GROUP BY runs first, collapsing input rows into one row per group. The window function then runs on the post-grouped rows. Example: SELECT department, COUNT() AS dept_count, RANK() OVER (ORDER BY COUNT() DESC) AS dept_rank FROM employees GROUP BY department.
Each row is one department; the window ranks departments by headcount.

Cross-Q: Can the window function reference columns not in the GROUP BY ?-- think --

A: Only via aggregates. After GROUP BY, the only valid expressions are the grouping columns and aggregate functions over the original columns. The window's PARTITION BY / ORDER BY / function arguments must use grouping columns or aggregates.
OVER (ORDER BY COUNT(*)) works; OVER (ORDER BY employee_name) doesn't compile because employee_name was collapsed.

Cross-Q²: What if I want both per-employee detail and department totals?-- think --

A: Drop the GROUP BY and use PARTITION BY: SELECT employee_name, department, COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY department) AS dept_count FROM employees. No collapsing, each row keeps its identity, the department total is computed via window.
Combining GROUP BY and window functions is for "group-level data with rank-among-groups" semantics, different use case from "row-level data with group context."

-- pause --
Drill 15, Performance versus correlated subqueries.

Q: My slow report uses (SELECT SUM(.) FROM t t2 WHERE t2.cust = t.cust AND t2.date <= t.date) for running totals. Why is it slow and what's the fix?-- think --

A: It's O(N²) per partition, for each row, it scans every earlier row in the same customer's history. The window-function equivalent ( SUM(.) OVER (PARTITION BY cust ORDER BY date) ) is O(N log N) total: one sort plus a single linear pass computing the running sum incrementally.
For 1M rows, that's the difference between minutes and seconds.

Cross-Q: Are there cases where the correlated subquery actually wins?-- think --

A: Rarely, but yes when the result is sparse and the optimizer can use an index seek to skip most rows: very selective predicates on a small subset, where only a handful of rows per partition match.
In those cases the correlated subquery touches few rows and the window function still sorts the entire partition. That is the same reasoning that makes LATERAL / CROSS APPLY beat a window function for top-N over a small driving set.
For a report that genuinely needs every group, the window function wins; profile both on production-shaped data before committing.

Cross-Q²: What index would best support a window function SUM(x) OVER (PARTITION BY cust ORDER BY date) ?-- think --

A: A composite index on (cust, date), the POC shape: Partitioning columns first, then Ordering columns in the direction the window asks for, Covering the rest via INCLUDE (x). The index pre-sorts by the window's partition and order keys, so the engine skips the sort step entirely.
The plan changes from Sort to WindowAgg to Index Scan to WindowAgg on Postgres Q L, and drops the Sort beneath Segment on sequel Server.
Microsoft's OVER documentation states the rule directly: the index key columns must match the PARTITION BY columns followed by the ORDER BY columns, and the key order must match the ORDER BY order.
How much it saves depends on whether the sort was spilling, measure it; the mechanism (one less sort of the whole input) is what to say in the interview.

-- pause --
Drill 16, What the window can see, and what it orders.

Q: My query is SELECT product, sales, 100.0 * sales / SUM(sales) OVER () AS pct FROM products WHERE category = 'Bikes'. What is the denominator?-- think --

A: Total sales of bikes, not total sales. Window functions run after FROM / WHERE / GROUP BY / HAVING, so the window's population is whatever survived the filter.
To get a share of the company total you compute it separately, a C T E with the unfiltered SUM, cross-joined in, or you keep every row and move the restriction into the numerator as conditional aggregation, SUM(sales) FILTER (WHERE category = 'Bikes') on Postgres Q L,
SUM(CASE WHEN category = 'Bikes' THEN sales END) on sequel Server and MySQL.

Cross-Q: My rows come back sorted by the window's ORDER BY even though I never wrote a query-level ORDER BY. Can I rely on that?-- think --

A: No. The window ORDER BY sequences the computation; presentation order is only guaranteed by a query-level ORDER BY.
Microsoft's OVER clause documentation draws the line explicitly, the OVER clause's ORDER BY "orders the rows in each partition", while "the ORDER BY clause in the SELECT statement determines the order in which the entire query result set is returned".
The ROW_NUMBER article puts the same point negatively: "There is no guarantee that the rows returned by a query using ROW_NUMBER() will be ordered exactly the same with each execution" unless the partitioning and ordering values are unique.
The rows arrive sorted because the plan happened to sort them; add an index that removes the sort, or let the plan go parallel, and the coincidence ends.

Cross-Q²: Where in a statement can a window function legally appear?-- think --

A: The SELECT list and the query's ORDER BY, Postgres Q L's manual says exactly that, and the other engines behave the same way. Not WHERE, not HAVING, not GROUP BY, not a CHECK constraint, not the ON clause of a join. Wrap it in a C T E or derived table to filter on it.
Note also that DISTINCT runs after window functions, so SELECT DISTINCT x, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (.) deduplicates nothing.

-- pause --
Drill 17, Portability: what breaks when this query moves engines.

Q: I have a working Postgres Q L query using AVG(x) OVER (ORDER BY d RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '6 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW). What happens on sequel Server?-- think --

A: It doesn't compile. sequel Server's documentation lists it as a limitation, "You can't use RANGE with PRECEDING or FOLLOWING ", so RANGE there is only UNBOUNDED PRECEDING, CURRENT ROW, UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING.
The workaround is to densify the date axis with a calendar table so every day has a row, then ROWS 6 PRECEDING is exactly 7 days. MySQL 8 does support the offset form, spelled INTERVAL 6 DAY PRECEDING.

Cross-Q: Name three other window features that differ between sequel Server and Postgres Q L, and say which way each goes.-- think --

A: FILTER (WHERE. ), Postgres Q L yes, sequel Server no (use CASE ). EXCLUDE CURRENT ROW / TIES / GROUP and GROUPS frame mode, Postgres Q L 11+ only. IGNORE NULLS, sequel Server 2022+ only; Postgres Q L's manual says it "is not implemented in Postgres Q L".
And the sharpest one: PERCENTILE_CONT is a window function only on sequel Server ( OVER mandatory, one row out per row in, hence the SELECT DISTINCT ) and an ordered-set aggregate only on Postgres Q L, where adding OVER raises "OVER is not supported for ordered-set aggregate percentile_cont".

Cross-Q²: What is the same everywhere and therefore safe to assume?-- think --

A: ROW_NUMBER / RANK / DENSE_RANK / NTILE, LAG / LEAD / FIRST_VALUE / LAST_VALUE, aggregate functions with OVER, PARTITION BY, ORDER BY, ROWS frames with numeric offsets, and the default frame rules ( RANGE UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW with ORDER BY, whole partition without).
Also absent from all three: DISTINCT inside a window aggregate, and QUALIFY. That common core is enough for almost every interview problem, which is exactly why the exceptions are what gets asked.

-- pause --
Drill 18, Window functions in a dot NET codebase.

Q: How do you express ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY. ) in E F Core link?-- think --

A: You don't. E F Core has no translation for the OVER clause; the tracking issue dotnet or efcore#12747 is open in the Backlog with no assignee.
The realistic options are raw sequel through Database.SqlQuery (unmapped types, E F Core 8+) or FromSql onto a keyless entity, a database view or table-valued function mapped with ToView / HasDbFunction so the sequel lives in migrations, or a third-party translator package.

Cross-Q: A colleague "solves" top-3-per-customer with db.Orders.ToList().GroupBy(o goes to o.CustomerId).Select(g goes to g.OrderByDescending(o goes to o.Total).Take(3)). What's wrong with it?-- think --

A: The ToList() ends the query. Everything after it runs in the application over the whole Orders table, a full read, all columns, all rows, per request.
E F Core 3.0 removed automatic client evaluation precisely so untranslatable queries throw instead of doing this silently, but an explicit ToList() opts back out of that protection. The database is the only place that can use the index.

Cross-Q²: Is ROW_NUMBER -based paging better or worse than Skip / Take ?-- think --

A: The same, and both degrade the same way. EF's Skip / Take emits OFFSET. FETCH NEXT (or LIMIT or OFFSET ), and a ROW_NUMBER() BETWEEN filter does the equivalent work: the engine still produces and discards every row before the offset, so page 5,000 costs proportionally more than page 1.
Keyset (seek) pagination, WHERE (created_at, id) < (@last Date, @last Id) ORDER BY created_at DESC, id DESC LIMIT 20 on Postgres Q L or MySQL, or the longhand created_at < @last Date OR (created_at = @last Date AND id < @last Id) on sequel Server, which has no row-value comparison,
is flat regardless of depth,
needs a matching index, and uses no window function at all.
The trade is that you lose random access to page N.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

OVER (): window function operates over the result; rows aren't collapsed.
PARTITION BY: groups rows into independent windows; like GROUP BY but without row collapse.
ORDER BY in OVER: defines window sequence; default frame becomes "from start to current row".
ROW_NUMBER versus RANK versus DENSE_RANK: unique sequence versus ties+gap versus ties+no-gap.
LAG / LEAD: peek backward / forward N rows; cleanest pattern for delta and "previous value".
LAST_VALUE gotcha: default frame ends at current row; explicitly set UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING for true last.
ROWS versus RANGE: physical row count versus value-based range; use ROWS by default.
Top-N per group: ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY g ORDER BY x DESC) in a C T E, then WHERE rn <= N.
Filtering windows: not allowed in WHERE; wrap in C T E or use QUALIFY (Teradata or Snowflake or BigQuery or Databricks or DuckDB, none of sequel Server, Postgres Q L, MySQL).
Gaps and islands: subtract ROW_NUMBER() from a date to collapse consecutive runs into the same group key.
Window ORDER BY not equal to result order: only a query-level ORDER BY guarantees presentation order.
Window population = post- WHERE rows: SUM(x) OVER () totals what survived the filter, not the table.
POC index: Partition columns, then Ordering columns in matching direction, Covering the rest, the one thing that removes the sort.
One sort per distinct (PARTITION BY, ORDER BY) pair, not per OVER clause.
sequel Server: no RANGE offsets, no GROUPS, no EXCLUDE, no FILTER; IGNORE NULLS and WINDOW from 2022; default RANGE frame forces the tempdb window spool.
Postgres Q L: has GROUPS, EXCLUDE, RANGE offsets, FILTER; no IGNORE NULLS (as of 18); percentile_cont is WITHIN GROUP only, never OVER.
No DISTINCT inside a window aggregate on any of the three, use two DENSE_RANK s or a GROUP BY C T E.
E F Core: no OVER translation ( efcore#12747 ); raw sequel, a view, or a TVF.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Running total killing a correlated subquery.

Problem: A finance dashboard shows monthly customer running totals. The query takes 8 seconds for 50k orders and crushes the database. Looking at the query, every row references a correlated subquery summing all prior orders for that customer.

Diagnosis: Senior pulls the query:

EXPLAIN ANALYZE confirms the shape: a SubPlan with loops equal to the outer row count, the inner SELECT runs once per order. The work per execution is proportional to how many of that customer's orders precede the current one, so the total is quadratic in the size of each customer partition.
With most customers holding a handful of orders that would be harmless; here a few wholesale accounts hold tens of thousands each, and those partitions dominate the runtime.
An index on (customer_id, created_at) makes each inner scan a range seek instead of a table scan, but it cannot change the number of executions, which is where the time goes.

Fix: Replace with a window function:

EXPLAIN ANALYZE now shows a single Sort feeding one WindowAgg node, no SubPlan, and loops = 1 everywhere. Adding the POC index (customer_id, created_at) INCLUDE (total) removes the Sort too, leaving Index Scan to WindowAgg.

Why it works: The window function makes one pass through the table, sorted by partition + order key, computing the running aggregate incrementally. The correlated subquery instead re-evaluates from scratch per row.
The cost difference is O(n log n) versus O(n²) in the partition size, so it is invisible for customers with three orders and brutal for the customer with fifty thousand.
If you quote a speed-up in an interview, quote it as "on this table, at this size", because the ratio is a property of the data, not of the rewrite.

The frame detail that matters here: the fix writes ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW rather than leaving the frame off. On Postgres Q L that mostly avoids the peer-tie semantics (two orders at the same created_at would otherwise share a running total).
On sequel Server the same edit also changes the physical plan, explicit ROWS gets the in-memory window spool, the default RANGE gets the tempdb worktable.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Window functions execute after WHERE in the logical pipeline. The result column doesn't exist when WHERE runs. Wrap in a C T E or subquery and filter outside, or use QUALIFY if your dialect supports it (BigQuery, Snowflake, DuckDB).

ROW_NUMBER picks exactly N rows even when there are ties (deterministic but arbitrary tie-breaking). RANK keeps all ties at rank N, possibly returning more than N rows. DENSE_RANK is similar but without gaps.
Pick by business need: "exactly 3 winners" -> ROW_NUMBER; "everyone tied at top 3" -> RANK or DENSE_RANK.

The default frame with ORDER BY is RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW, so "last value" is the current row's value. Override the frame to ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING to peek to the partition's actual end.

ROWS counts physical rows, not time. With sparse data (for example, a customer logs in only on weekdays), 6 preceding rows might span 8 calendar days. Use RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL '6 days' PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW to get a true 7-day window based on the ORDER BY value.

The grp value is constant within a consecutive run because the date and the row number both increment by 1; gaps break the synchrony.

No. It determines the order in which the window function is computed. Presentation order is guaranteed only by a query-level ORDER BY.
Microsoft's OVER clause documentation states both halves: the OVER clause's ORDER BY "orders the rows in each partition", while "the ORDER BY clause in the SELECT statement determines the order in which the entire query result set is returned".
Rows commonly do arrive in window order because the plan sorted them, until an index makes the sort unnecessary or the plan goes parallel.

Bikes only. Window functions execute after FROM / WHERE / GROUP BY / HAVING, so the window's population is the rows that survived the filter.
For a share of the unfiltered total, compute the grand total in a separate C T E and join or cross-join it in, or drop the WHERE and use conditional aggregation.

Only the last, and only from sequel Server 2022 (16.x) at compatibility level 160. The OVER documentation lists the RANGE restriction explicitly, no PRECEDING / FOLLOWING with RANGE, and GROUPS, EXCLUDE and FILTER are absent from the T sequel grammar entirely.
GROUPS and EXCLUDE are Postgres Q L 11+; FILTER is Postgres Q L (also SQLite and DuckDB); on sequel Server and MySQL you write SUM(CASE WHEN. THEN. END) OVER (. ).

Omitting the frame gives you the default RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW.
In row mode the aggregate is computed by a Window Spool operator that, per Microsoft, "expands each row into the set of rows that represents the window associated with it" and stores them "in a hidden worktable in the tempdb database or in memory".
With ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING the engine writes a fixed tiny number of rows per input row and can use the in-memory worktable; with RANGE it cannot predict how many peers share the current ordering value, so it uses the on-disk tempdb worktable.
Itzik Ben-Gan documents the 10,000-rows-per-underlying-row threshold and measured a multi-fold difference on his test data. The results differ too, whenever d has duplicates: RANGE gives all peers the same running total.

DISTINCT inside a window aggregate is rejected by sequel Server (its OVER documentation lists it under Limitations), by Postgres Q L ( DISTINCT is not implemented for window functions ) and by MySQL. The portable trick is two dense ranks in opposite directions:

Each distinct value gets rank k ascending and d − k + 1 descending, so the sum is always d + 1. Nulls get their own rank, so exclude them first if a null shouldn't count. The readable alternative is a GROUP BY C T E joined back.

sequel Server, PERCENTILE_CONT exists only as a window function, OVER is mandatory, and it returns one row per input row, so you deduplicate:

Postgres Q L, it exists only as an ordered-set aggregate; adding OVER raises OVER is not supported for ordered-set aggregate percentile_cont:

MySQL 8 has neither function.

Moving-aggregate mode.
A frame whose start moves needs the aggregate to remove rows as well as add them, which Postgres Q L does via an inverse transition function, with one, "the run time is only proportional to the number of input rows";
without one, the aggregate is recalculated from scratch at every frame move, giving run time "proportional to the number of input rows times the average frame length".
Sum and average over float4 / float8 deliberately have no inverse transition function, because floating-point subtraction does not undo floating-point addition (the manual's example: 1e20 + 1 = 1e20, so subtracting 1e20 yields 0, not 1 ).
It is a second reason, on top of reproducibility, to store money as numeric.

A POC index: (customer_id, created_at) INCLUDE (total), partition columns first, then ordering columns in the direction the window asks for, covering the remaining columns.
Microsoft's OVER documentation states the rule: the index key columns must match the PARTITION BY columns followed by the ORDER BY columns, in the ORDER BY 's order. Before: Postgres Q L WindowAgg to Sort to Seq Scan; sequel Server Stream Aggregate to Window Spool to Segment to Sort to Scan.
After: the Sort disappears and the scan becomes an index scan. Mixed directions ( ORDER BY a ASC, b DESC ) need an index declared with those directions, reading an index backwards flips all the columns, not one.

You don't, there is no OVER translation, and dotnet or efcore#12747 is still open in the Backlog. Use raw sequel ( Database.SqlQuery for unmapped types from E F Core 8, or FromSql onto a keyless entity), or push the query into a view / table-valued function mapped with ToView / HasDbFunction.
Materialising with ToList() and grouping in memory is not a workaround, it turns an indexable query into a full table read, and it bypasses the E F Core 3.0+ behaviour of throwing on untranslatable queries.