-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

Aggregations turn raw data into insights. "How many orders this month?" is COUNT. "Total revenue per customer?" is SUM + GROUP BY. "Customers who spent more than $10k last year?" is SUM + GROUP BY + HAVING. Every reporting query, dashboard, and metric is an aggregation.

For interviews, GROUP BY questions are second only to joins in frequency. The bar isn't "I can count rows", it's "I can write a query producing the per-customer running totals with averages, distinct counts, and conditional sums in one pass." The patterns cover that bar.

When NOT to aggregate: row-level operations (filters, joins) come first; aggregate only when you need group-level results. Don't pre-aggregate "just in case", aggregations cost C P U.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Aggregate functions.

The standard set:

COUNT(*), row count, counts rows including NULLs.
COUNT(col), count of non-NULL values, NULLs excluded.
COUNT(DISTINCT col), unique non-NULL count, costs a sort or hash.
SUM(col), total, NULLs ignored; result is NULL if all input NULL.
AVG(col), mean, NULLs ignored.
MIN(col) / MAX(col), extremes, works on numbers, dates, strings.
STRING_AGG(col, sep), concatenated string, Postgres Q L; sequel Server 2017+, ordering syntax differs, see.
GROUP_CONCAT(col SEPARATOR sep), same, MySQL.
STDDEV / VAR_SAMP, statistical, population versus sample variants per dialect.
BIT_AND / BIT_OR, bitwise, rare.

COUNT(*) versus COUNT(col):
COUNT(*) is "how many rows?", the cheapest of the three, but not free, and no MVCC engine answers it from a stored counter.
Postgres Q L and InnoDB have to decide, row by row, whether each version is visible to your snapshot: Postgres Q L consults the heap, or the visibility map when the plan is an index-only scan; InnoDB checks the record's transaction id and follows the undo log where the row has been modified.
sequel Server scans the narrowest index that covers the table, and only pays a version-chain cost when row versioning is switched on ( READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT, SNAPSHOT ).
(The historical exception is MySQL's MyISAM, which keeps an exact row count in the table header and answers an unfiltered COUNT(*) from it, one of the few things it does better than InnoDB, and not a reason to use it.) "Fast" means "no per-value work", not "constant time".
COUNT(col) skips rows where col is NULL.
COUNT(DISTINCT col) adds dedup cost, a sort or a hash table over the values. Careful with the usual "equivalent" rewrite: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT DISTINCT col FROM t) s counts NULL as one distinct value; COUNT(DISTINCT col) does not. The honest equivalent adds WHERE col IS NOT NULL.

If a number is for a dashboard rather than an invoice, ask the catalog instead of the table. Postgres Q L keeps pg_class.reltuples, the docs describe it as "Number of live rows in the table. This is only an estimate used by the planner.
It is updated by VACUUM, ANALYZE, and a few DDL commands such as CREATE INDEX.
If the table has never yet been vacuumed or analyzed, reltuples contains -1 indicating that the row count is unknown." sequel Server exposes sys dm db partition stats row count, documented as "The approximate number of rows in the partition", sum it across index_id IN (0, 1) for a whole table.

In the real world: an admin screen shows "Orders: N" from SELECT COUNT() FROM orders and it is instant for two years.
Then the table crosses a few hundred million rows and the page starts timing out at 30 seconds, because on Postgres Q L that count reads every visible row, an index-only scan over the narrowest index will cut the I O when the visibility map is set, but it still touches one entry per row,
so the cost tracks the table size and no index makes it constant.
The team splits the requirement in two: the header badge reads reltuples from pg_class and says " approximately ", while the month-end reconciliation keeps the exact COUNT() and runs on the reporting replica where nobody is waiting on a page render.
The lesson is not "counting is slow", it is that "exact" was never a requirement of the header badge, and nobody had asked.

COUNT also has a return type. In sequel Server COUNT returns int and overflows past 2,147,483,647 with Msg 8115, Arithmetic overflow error converting expression to data type int, the docs say to use COUNT_BIG for those results.
Postgres Q L's count() returns bigint already, so the problem never appears there.

-- pause --
GROUP BY mechanics.

GROUP BY collapses rows that share the same values for the group columns into a single output row.

For each unique customer_id, you get one row. COUNT(*) is the count of orders for that customer; SUM(total) is their total spend.

The "all non-aggregated columns must be in GROUP BY" rule:

Exception: Postgres Q L and MySQL allow name if it's functionally dependent on the GROUP BY columns, that is, if customer_id determines name, so one customer_id can only mean one name.
This is optional feature T301 of sequel:1999, and the two engines detect it to different depths:
Postgres Q L's docs say it "recognizes functional dependency (allowing columns to be omitted from GROUP BY ) only when a table's primary key is included in the GROUP BY list", while MySQL also accepts a UNIQUE NOT NULL key and chains dependencies through joins.
sequel Server does not implement it at all: it rejects the query with error 8120, "Column. is invalid in the select list because it is not contained in either an aggregate function or the GROUP BY clause." Oracle rejects it too.

MySQL's older behaviour, accepting any non-aggregated column and silently picking a value, is controlled by the ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY sequel mode, which is on by default in modern MySQL.
With it off, the manual's warning is blunt: "the server is free to choose any value from each group, so unless they are the same, the values chosen are nondeterministic. the selection of values from each group cannot be influenced by adding an ORDER BY clause."

In the real world: a team lifts a reporting service off MySQL 5.6 onto a managed MySQL 8 instance, and a dozen queries that had run for years start failing at boot with "Expression #2 of SELECT list is not in GROUP BY clause and contains nonaggregated column".
Their first move is to switch ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY off in the parameter group and ship.
Reading the failures afterwards showed why that was the wrong instinct: three of the twelve were selecting product.name grouped by order_id, which had been quietly returning one arbitrary product name per order to a customer-facing invoice PDF for two years.
The mode had not broken the queries, it had found a bug the old server was hiding.

Multi-column GROUP BY:

Groups by every unique (country, status) tuple. If you have ('PK', 'Pending'), ('PK', 'Paid'), ('US', 'Pending'), you get three groups.

GROUP BY is not ORDER BY. No engine promises an order for grouped output. A hash-based aggregate emits groups in hash-bucket order; a sort-based one emits them sorted, and which of the two you get is a costing decision that can flip when the table grows or statistics change.
MySQL used to sort as a side effect and documents the removal explicitly: "Previously (MySQL 5.7 and lower), GROUP BY sorted implicitly under certain conditions.
In MySQL 8.0, that no longer occurs, so specifying ORDER BY NULL at the end to suppress implicit sorting (as was done previously) is no longer necessary. However, query results may differ from previous MySQL versions." If you want an order, write ORDER BY.

In the real world: a nightly job exports a grouped CSV to a partner SFTP site, and the partner diffs each file against the previous night to find changes. It works for years on MySQL 5.7, where the GROUP BY happened to come back sorted by the grouping column.
After the 8.0 upgrade the totals are identical and every diff is a full-file rewrite, because the row order now follows a hash. The partner's alerting reads "100% of records changed" and someone gets paged at 03:00.
One ORDER BY country, status on the export query, three seconds of work, was the whole fix; the expensive part was the two days spent looking for a data bug that did not exist.

-- pause --
HAVING, filtering groups.

WHERE filters rows before grouping. HAVING filters groups after aggregation. Aggregate functions can only appear in HAVING (or SELECT / ORDER BY ).

The evaluation order is fixed:

Often, a query can be written with either WHERE or HAVING; pick the one that filters more aggressively earlier (WHERE on row-level columns; HAVING on aggregates).
Postgres Q L's planner will move a HAVING qual into WHERE for you when it is safe to, subquery_planner in src or backend or optimizer or plan or planner.c does it for quals containing no aggregate, no volatile function, no subplan and no grouping-set reference, but write it in WHERE anyway:
it is portable, and it says what you meant.

The important half of this is not performance. Moving a predicate between WHERE and HAVING can change the answer, because one filters the rows that feed the aggregate and the other filters the finished aggregate.
WHERE created_at >=:d GROUP BY customer_id HAVING COUNT(*) > 5 means "more than five orders since d". GROUP BY customer_id HAVING COUNT(*) > 5 AND MAX(created_at) >=:d means "more than five orders ever, and active since d". Different customers, same shape.

In the real world: a marketing segment called "loyal, recently active" was defined by a query that grouped the whole orders table and filtered with HAVING COUNT(*) > 5 AND MAX(created_at) >= NOW() - INTERVAL '30 days'.
Someone tuning slow queries moved both predicates into WHERE to get the date filter under the aggregate, the runtime dropped, and the segment quietly shrank by a third, because the rewrite now demanded five orders within the last 30 days rather than five orders lifetime.
Nobody noticed for a fortnight; the campaign that went out in the meantime targeted the wrong list.
When a predicate moves across the grouping boundary, it is a semantic change that needs the same review as a schema change, and the fastest way to prove it is to run both versions and diff the key sets.

-- pause --
DISTINCT inside aggregates.

COUNT(DISTINCT col) and SUM(DISTINCT col) aggregate over unique values only.

COUNT(DISTINCT) is the most common; SUM(DISTINCT) and AVG(DISTINCT) exist but rarely make business sense.

Know why it costs what it costs. SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX are streaming aggregates: one running value per group, constant memory, and the row can be forgotten as soon as it is added.
COUNT(DISTINCT col) cannot forget, it has to remember every value it has already seen in that group, so its memory is proportional to the number of distinct values per group, and a second COUNT(DISTINCT other_col) in the same SELECT needs its own separate structure.
That is the reason a query with three distinct-counts behaves nothing like the same query with three sums.

The other property that catches teams out is arithmetic, not performance: distinct counts are not additive. Summing seven daily unique-user counts does not give the weekly unique-user count, because a user who visited on three days is counted three times.
Sums and counts roll up; distinct counts have to be recomputed over the wider window, or approximated with a mergeable sketch (see Approximate distinct counts).

In the real world: a product dashboard built its monthly-active-users tile by summing the 30 daily-active-user rows from a pre-aggregated table, because the daily table was already there and the query was fast.
MAU therefore ran roughly at the level of "total visits", and the growth curve looked wonderful right up until finance compared it with the billing system's account count and found MAU exceeding the number of accounts that existed.
The fix was two-part: recompute MAU as a real COUNT(DISTINCT user_id) over the month for the reported number, and store an HLL sketch per day for the exploratory dashboards, because sketches, unlike counts, can be merged across days.

-- pause --
String aggregation (STRING_AGG / GROUP_CONCAT).

Combine string values within a group, separated by a delimiter.

Useful for:
Email reports: "Order #42 contains: Laptop, Mouse, Keyboard."
Tag aggregation: collapsing many tags-per-row into one display string.
CSV exports of grouped data.

Every engine caps the result, and they fail in different ways, this is the part that bites in production, because it only triggers for your largest group:

MySQL, group_concat_max_len, default 1024 bytes, session-settable, Silently truncates (a warning is raised; most drivers never surface it).
sequel Server, Return type follows the input: a non- MAX varchar / nvarchar input yields varchar(8000) / nvarchar(4000); non-string inputs yield nvarchar(4000), Error 9829, "STRING_AGG aggregation result exceeded the limit of 8000 bytes.
Use LOB types to avoid result truncation." Fix by converting the input: STRING_AGG(CONVERT(NVARCHAR(MAX), col), ', '), which is what most of the examples in Microsoft's own documentation do.
Postgres Q L, text, bounded by the 1 gigabyte field limit, No practical cap for this use.
Oracle, LISTAGG returns VARCHAR2 (4000 bytes by default), ORA-01489 unless you write ON OVERFLOW TRUNCATE (12.2+).

In the real world: an order-confirmation service built its "items in this order" line with STRING_AGG(item_name, ', ') on sequel Server and shipped fine for months.
The first customer to order 300 line items got no email at all: the aggregate's return type was nvarchar(4000), the concatenation crossed it, and error 9829 killed the whole statement, so a wholesale account's confirmations failed while every retail order kept working.
Because the failure was inside a background job with a generic retry, the alert said "job failed" and not "one customer is too big".
Wrapping the column in CONVERT(NVARCHAR(MAX),.) fixed it permanently; the durable lesson was to seed the test data with one absurdly large group instead of a hundred typical ones.

-- pause --
Conditional aggregation (CASE inside aggregate).

The most powerful pattern: pivot-like results without PIVOT syntax.

Result is a wide table with one row per customer + a column per status, exactly what most reports want.

* COUNT() after a LEFT JOIN is almost always a bug.* A customer with no orders still produces one row, every orders column NULL, and COUNT() counts rows, so that customer reports total = 1. COUNT(o.id) counts non-NULL values of a column from the outer side and reports 0.
The conditional SUM(CASE.) columns are already safe, because no status matches NULL; it is the innocent-looking COUNT(*) that lies.

In the real world: an account-health screen listed every customer with their order count, and support kept escalating tickets about customers whose profile said "1 order" but whose order list was empty.
The query was SELECT c.id, COUNT() FROM customers c LEFT JOIN orders o ON o.customer_id = c.id GROUP BY c.id. Nothing about it looks wrong, and it is right for every customer who has ever ordered, only the empty ones are off, and only by one. It survived code review twice.
Changing COUNT() to COUNT(o.id) fixed it, and the team added a test fixture containing a customer with no children, which is the fixture most seed scripts forget.

COUNT(CASE.) works too (since COUNT ignores NULLs):

For boolean-style aggregates (in Postgres Q L):

Standard sequel has a dedicated syntax for this, the FILTER clause, added in sequel:2003, and Postgres Q L (9.4+) and SQLite implement it:

sequel Server has no FILTER clause, not in 2022, and not in the 2025 language additions either, which brought PRODUCT, JSON_ARRAYAGG, JSON_OBJECTAGG and the REGEXP_* family but nothing here. So SUM(CASE.) / COUNT(CASE.) stays the portable form, and on Postgres Q L FILTER is the readable one.
They express the same thing.

-- pause --
ROLLUP, CUBE, GROUPING SETS.

For multi-level subtotals, generating "country totals" + "country+status totals" + "grand total" in one query.

ROLLUP, hierarchical subtotals (left-to-right):

Result includes:
Each (country, status) group.
Each country subtotal (with status as NULL).
Grand total (with both NULL).

CUBE, every combination of subtotals:

Adds status subtotals (across all countries) on top of what ROLLUP gives.

GROUPING SETS, explicit list of grouping combinations:

Semantically the same result as UNION ALL -ing the separate GROUP BYs, Microsoft's documentation says exactly that, "the results are the same as using UNION ALL on the specified groups", but the engine gets to compute several sets from one read of the input instead of one read per set.
Postgres Q L 10 and later can even mix strategies inside one node: a plan for grouping sets shows MixedAggregate with several Hash Key lines and a Group Key, meaning it filled hash tables for some sets while walking a sorted input for another.
Don't promise "one pass" in an interview; promise "one read of the input feeding several accumulators", which is the part that is actually true.

Two engine limits worth knowing before you design a report around this:

sequel Server caps the lattice. "For a GROUP BY clause that uses ROLLUP, CUBE, or GROUPING SETS, the maximum number of expressions is 32. The maximum number of groups is 4,096 (212)." CUBE over 13 columns produces 8,192 grouping sets and fails outright, not slowly, but with an error.
Duplicate sets are not merged. "sequel doesn't consolidate duplicate groups generated for a GROUPING SETS list", GROUP BY GROUPING SETS ((), CUBE(a, b)) emits the grand total twice, because CUBE already contains (). Two identical rows in a report is the kind of bug that gets blamed on the join.

GROUPING(col) distinguishes "subtotal NULL" from "actual data NULL":

Engine support is not uniform, and this is a portability trap. Postgres Q L (9.5+), sequel Server (2008+) and Oracle have all three: ROLLUP(), CUBE(), GROUPING SETS(). MySQL has only ROLLUP, written either as GROUP BY year WITH ROLLUP or, in MySQL 8, GROUP BY ROLLUP(year), plus GROUPING().
There is no CUBE and no GROUPING SETS in MySQL; the fallback is UNION ALL of separate GROUP BY queries, which costs one pass per set instead of one pass total.

In the real world: a finance report was written on Postgres Q L with GROUPING SETS ((region, product), (region), (product), ()), one query, one pass, four levels of subtotal, and a GROUPING() call labelling each row.
When the same reporting module had to run against a customer's on-premises MySQL, the query would not parse. Rewriting it as four UNION ALL branches produced identical numbers but read the fact table four times, and the nightly job moved from minutes to most of an hour.
The team ended up materialising the finest grain ( region, product ) into a small table and computing the three coarser levels from that, which is the answer whenever the sets form a hierarchy, and would have been the better design on Postgres Q L too.

These are advanced features; many teams reach for app-level aggregation or reporting tools instead. Know they exist for interview / DBA scenarios.

-- pause --
How the engine groups, hash versus sort.

Everything is semantics. Under it there are only two algorithms, and being able to name the one in your plan is most of what "can you read an execution plan" means for aggregation.

The names differ by engine, the operators do not:

Postgres Q L, HashAggregate, GroupAggregate (with a Sort or ordered index scan beneath).
sequel Server, Hash Match (Aggregate), Stream Aggregate (with Sort or an ordered index seek or scan beneath).
MySQL or InnoDB, temporary table ( Using temporary in EXPLAIN ), index scan ( Using index for group-by = loose index scan).

The optimizer picks by estimated group count and by whether ordered input is already available.
Hash wins when there are few groups relative to rows and nothing is sorted; sort wins when an index already delivers the order, when the group count is huge, or when the query needs that order anyway for ORDER BY.

Parallelism changes the shape again.
A parallel aggregate is computed in two phases: each worker aggregates its slice (Postgres Q L shows Partial HashAggregate; sequel Server shows a partial Hash Match the exchange), then one node combines the partials ( Finalize GroupAggregate under a Gather, or the global Hash Match the exchange).
This is why AVG parallelizes at all, the partial result is a (sum, count) pair, combined by summing both and dividing once at the end, and why COUNT(DISTINCT) is so much harder to parallelize: partial sets have to be merged, not partial numbers.

One consequence worth carrying into an interview: a parallel SUM over float / real is not bit-for-bit deterministic. IEEE-754 addition is not associative, so a different split of rows across workers can change the last digits.
That is a mechanism, not a bug, and it is one of the reasons money belongs in decimal / numeric, where addition is exact until it overflows.

In the real world: a "revenue by day" tile on an internal dashboard disagreed with itself between refreshes, the same day would read 18,244.31999999998 and 18,244.32 in alternate loads.
The column was double precision because whoever created the table years earlier had typed float out of habit, and the plan had recently gone parallel as the table grew, so the addition order changed run to run. Nobody had lost money; the ledger was correct.
But a finance dashboard that visibly disagrees with itself destroys trust in every other number on the page, and the migration to numeric(12,2) was signed off the same week, which had been sitting in the backlog, unloved, for a year.

-- pause --
When the estimate is wrong, spills and memory grants.

A hash aggregate's memory is proportional to the number of groups, and the engine has to guess that number before it runs. When the guess is far too low, the hash table does not fit in the memory it was given, and the operator spills to disk.

Postgres Q L allows each hash node work_mem times hash_mem_multiplier (defaults: 4 megabytes and 2.0 in current versions, and note the docs' warning that a complex query "might perform several sort and hash operations at the same time", each entitled to that much).
Beyond it, Postgres Q L 13 and later spill.
The release note for that change is worth quoting because it also describes the old failure mode:

"Previously, hash aggregation was avoided if it was expected to use more than work_mem memory. Now, a hash aggregation plan can be chosen despite that. The hash table will be spilled to disk if it exceeds work_mem times hash_mem_multiplier.
This behavior is normally preferable to the old behavior, in which once hash aggregation had been chosen, the hash table would be kept in memory no matter how large it got, which could be very large if the planner had misestimated."

EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS) tells you it happened: a HashAggregate node reports Planned Partitions, Batches, Memory Usage and Disk Usage, and a Sort reports Sort Method: external merge Disk:. kB. Anything Batches: 1, or any Disk: line, means the aggregate went to storage.

sequel Server decides differently: the query gets a memory grant fixed at compile time from the estimated rows and row size, and it cannot grow while the query runs.
Too small a grant and the hash aggregate or sort spills to tempdb, which the plan flags with a spill warning on the operator; sys.dm_exec_query_memory_grants shows what was asked for versus used while it runs.
Too large a grant is its own outage, the query holds memory it never uses, and other queries queue behind it waiting for a grant.
Memory grant feedback (part of intelligent query processing) corrects a grant that was badly wrong, but it does so for later executions of the same plan, not the one currently spilling.

The root cause is nearly always the group-count estimate on multiple columns. Single-column statistics know how many distinct countries there are and how many distinct statuses, but not how many combinations actually occur. Postgres Q L states the problem and the fix directly:

"Estimates of the number of distinct values when combining more than one column (for example, for GROUP BY a, b ) are frequently wrong when the planner only has single-column statistical data, causing it to select bad plans.
To improve such estimates, ANALYZE can collect n-distinct statistics for groups of columns."

The docs add the discipline that goes with it: "It's advisable to create ndistinct statistics objects only on combinations of columns that are actually used for grouping,
and for which misestimation of the number of groups is resulting in bad plans." sequel Server's equivalent lever is a multi-column statistics object, whose density vector serves the same purpose for the leading columns.

In the real world: a nightly rollup grouped an events table by (tenant_id, event_type) and ran for months on Postgres Q L 12.
Then a large tenant onboarded, the real number of combinations grew far beyond what single-column statistics implied, and the job stopped being slow and started being fatal:
the hash table kept growing in memory, exactly the pre-13 behaviour described, until the OOM killer took the postmaster down and every connection on the box died with it.
The immediate fix was SET enable_hashagg = off for that one job, which forced a sort-based aggregate that spills gracefully. The real fixes came in the next sprint: an ndistinct extended statistic on the pair, and the version upgrade that makes hash aggregation spill instead of dying.

In the real world: on sequel Server, the same class of bug looks nothing like an OOM.
A month-end report estimated a few thousand groups, was granted memory to match, and produced tens of millions;
the hash aggregate spilled to tempdb, tempdb filled the volume, and the queries that failed were other people's, anyone whose session needed tempdb for a sort or a version store while the report ran.
The report itself finished, slowly, and looked innocent in the logs. Reading the actual plan showed the spill warning and an estimate three orders of magnitude actual; a filtered multi-column statistic on the grouping keys, plus moving the job to the read-only replica, ended the pattern.

-- pause --
Indexing for GROUP BY.

An index helps a GROUP BY in three distinct ways, and they are worth separating because they need different indexes.

Order, an index on the grouping columns delivers rows already sorted, so the engine can use a stream aggregate with no Sort node and constant memory.
The grouping columns must be a leading prefix of the index: an index on (customer_id, created_at) serves GROUP BY customer_id, but not GROUP BY created_at.
Covering, if every column the query touches is in the index, the aggregate never reads the base table.
CREATE INDEX ix ON orders (customer_id) INCLUDE (total) (sequel Server) or CREATE INDEX ix ON orders (customer_id, total) (Postgres Q L, MySQL) turns "scan the whole row" into "scan a narrow index".
Skipping, some engines can jump between distinct key values instead of reading every row.
MySQL calls this a loose index scan and shows Using index for group-by in EXPLAIN; the manual's conditions are strict:
single table, the GROUP BY names a leftmost prefix of one index and nothing else, and the only aggregates are MIN() / MAX() over one column that immediately follows the grouping columns in that index.
Postgres Q L applies a related trick to ungrouped MIN() / MAX(), rewriting SELECT MAX(created_at) FROM orders into an ORDER BY. LIMIT 1 index scan visible as an InitPlan in the plan, a WHERE clause is fine, but a GROUP BY disables it entirely:
SELECT customer_id, MAX(created_at). GROUP BY customer_id gets no such shortcut.

Grouping by an expression discards all of this. GROUP BY DATE_TRUNC('month', created_at) cannot use a plain index on created_at, because the index stores timestamps and the query groups on a function of them. The fix is an index on the same expression, with a Postgres Q L-specific catch:

sequel Server's route is a computed column marked PERSISTED, which can then be indexed. MySQL 8 supports functional indexes on expressions.

In the real world: an orders table with a clustered index on id (an identity column) backed a page that showed each customer's order count and lifetime spend. At a few million rows the query was a clustered-index scan and nobody minded.
At a few hundred million, that scan was reading every column of every order, addresses, Jason blobs, the lot, to compute two numbers, and the page was the slowest endpoint in the system.
Adding (customer_id) INCLUDE (total) did not change a line of application code and turned it into a narrow, ordered, covering scan feeding a stream aggregate.
The instructive part is the diagnosis: the clustered index was not "wrong", it was simply not the shape this query needed, and no amount of query rewriting could have substituted for the missing index.

-- pause --
The zero-row trap, aggregates over an empty set.

This is the highest-frequency production bug in this whole topic, and it is pure semantics.

Three consequences a senior candidate should be able to state without thinking:

SUM of nothing is NULL, not 0. Any arithmetic downstream turns NULL too. COALESCE(SUM(total), 0) is the fix, and it belongs in the query, not the C sharp mapping.
A grouped query returns nothing for groups that do not exist. "Revenue per day for the last 30 days" silently skips days with no orders, the chart shows 29 points and the line joins across the gap as though nothing happened.
Generate the axis and outer-join the aggregate onto it ( generate_series in Postgres Q L, a calendar table in sequel Server) if a zero is meant to be visible.
HAVING without GROUP BY treats the whole table as one group, and can remove that single row: SELECT COUNT() FROM orders HAVING COUNT() > 5 returns one row or none.
A caller written as ExecuteScalar() gets null in the "none" case and generally throws or coerces to zero, which is the opposite of what the predicate meant.

In the real world: a payments team monitored failures with SELECT COUNT() AS failures FROM payments WHERE status='Failed' AND created_at > NOW() - INTERVAL '5 minutes' HAVING COUNT() > 10, and wired the alert to fire "if the query returns a row". It worked in testing.
In the incident it did not fire, the gateway had gone down so completely that no payment rows were being written at all, so the count was 0, HAVING dropped the row, the alert saw an empty result and concluded "nothing wrong".
The rule that came out of it: alerting queries must always return a row, with the predicate applied by the alerting layer, not by HAVING. SELECT COALESCE(COUNT(*), 0). with no HAVING, and a threshold in the monitor.

In the real world: an ops dashboard rendered "Orders today:, " every morning until the first order arrived, because the tile bound to SUM(total) and the A P I returned null.
Support treated it as an outage indicator ("the dashboard is broken again") and stopped trusting the tile, so when a genuine ingestion failure produced the same dash at 11:00 nobody escalated.
COALESCE(SUM(total), 0) plus a separate freshness indicator ("last order 4 minutes ago") made the two states distinguishable: zero is a number, unknown is not.

-- pause --
Aggregation under concurrency.

Long aggregate queries and O L T P traffic on the same tables is where "the report locked the database" comes from, and the answer is entirely engine-specific.

sequel Server with the default READ COMMITTED and READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT OFF reads by locking.
Microsoft's own description: "If the database option READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT is OFF, the Database Engine acquires shared locks as data is read and releases those locks when the read operation is completed.
If the database option READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT is ON, the Database Engine doesn't acquire locks and uses row versioning." A report that scans ten million rows therefore takes and releases shared locks over ten million rows, and any writer wanting a row the scan is currently holding waits for it.
Once a scan accumulates enough locks, sequel Server escalates, and note where to:
the documentation is explicit that the engine "doesn't escalate row or key-range locks to page locks, but escalates them directly to table locks" (or to the partition's HoBT, if LOCK_ESCALATION is set to AUTO on a partitioned table).
After that, writers to the whole object wait wholesale rather than one row at a time. Note the default differs by product: sequel Server ships with RCSI off, Azure sequel Database ships with it on, the same query, the same code, different blocking behaviour after a migration.

The reflex fix, WITH (NOLOCK), is worse than its reputation for a report, because it does not merely permit dirty reads.
The documentation is explicit that it "might generate errors for your transaction, present users with data that was never committed, or cause users to see records twice (or not at all)", and "twice (or not at all)" applied to a SUM is a total that is wrong by an unknown amount,
with no error and no way to detect it after the fact.
A financial number produced under NOLOCK cannot be defended.

Postgres Q L and InnoDB do not have this problem in the same shape, because readers use MVCC snapshots and do not take row locks for plain SELECT s: the report does not block checkout, and checkout does not block the report. What they have instead is a duration problem.
A statement that runs for an hour holds back the oldest snapshot the system must preserve, so VACUUM (or InnoDB's purge) cannot clean up row versions that the report might still need, and the table bloats while it runs.
On a Postgres Q L hot standby the same query hits the opposite failure, the standby has to apply write-ahead log that removes rows the query is reading, and the query dies with ERROR:
canceling statement due to conflict with recovery unless max_standby_streaming_delay or hot_standby_feedback is tuned for it.

The senior answer to "how do you stop the report locking production" is therefore a short list, in order: run it on a replica; if it must run on the primary, use row versioning (RCSI or SNAPSHOT on sequel Server, where it is a snapshot, not a "no locking" hint, so the totals are still consistent);
make the query cheap enough not to matter with a covering index or a pre-aggregated table; and only then consider chunking it into ranges, accepting that chunks are separate snapshots and the totals no longer represent a single instant.

In the real world: a finance team ran a month-end report against the production sequel Server at 09:00 on the first of the month.
It scanned the whole orders table under locking READ COMMITTED, checkout writes queued behind its shared locks, request threads piled up waiting on the database,
and the site was effectively down for eleven minutes, with an application error rate that pointed at the web tier rather than at the query.
The first "fix" was NOLOCK, which stopped the blocking and started a subtler problem: the report's totals no longer reconciled with the ledger, and it took a fortnight to work out that the query was reading rows moved by concurrent updates.
Enabling RCSI made the report non-blocking and consistent, at the cost of version-store space in tempdb, which is a capacity decision to make deliberately rather than discover.

-- pause --
Pre-aggregation, summary tables, indexed views, materialized views.

When the same aggregate is asked for repeatedly, stop computing it repeatedly. Three levels, with real differences:

A summary table you maintain. A daily_revenue(day, currency, gross, refunds, order_count) table written by a job or by the application. Total control, total responsibility: the hard part is not the insert, it is late-arriving data.
If the job refreshes "yesterday" on a watermark and a refund is backdated to last week, the summary is now wrong and nothing tells you. Either re-derive a trailing window every run, or record a source_max_updated_at per row so you can prove what the summary was built from.

sequel Server indexed views, the engine maintains the aggregate for you, synchronously, as part of every write to the base tables.
The restrictions in Microsoft's documentation are the whole story of what "synchronously maintainable" means: WITH SCHEMABINDING, a unique clustered index, and "if GROUP BY is present, the VIEW definition must contain COUNT_BIG(*) and must not contain HAVING ".
COUNT (use COUNT_BIG ), AVG (store SUM and COUNT_BIG and divide at read time), MIN / MAX, STRING_AGG, DISTINCT, outer joins, subqueries, CTEs, UNION, ROLLUP / CUBE / GROUPING SETS and TOP are all disallowed.
The pattern is consistent: anything the engine cannot update incrementally from a single row change is banned, a SUM can be adjusted by a delta, a MAX cannot when the maximum row is the one being deleted.
Two more practicalities: the optimizer can use an indexed view without the query naming it, but automatic matching is edition-dependent, Standard edition needs WITH (NOEXPAND),
while Azure sequel Database and Managed Instance match automatically, and every INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE on a base table now maintains the view too, which the docs warn "can degrade significantly" for tables under many indexed views.

Postgres Q L materialized views, the opposite trade. No maintenance cost on writes, because there is no incremental maintenance at all: REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW re-runs the whole query and replaces the contents.
Plain REFRESH "could block other connections which are trying to read from the materialized view";
REFRESH. CONCURRENTLY does not lock out readers, but requires "at least one UNIQUE index on the materialized view which uses only column names and includes all rows", and only one refresh at a time may run.
So the data is exactly as fresh as your last refresh, and you own the schedule. MySQL has no materialized views at all, there, the summary table is the only option.

In the real world: a pricing page was backed by a materialized view refreshed by cron every 15 minutes,
which was fine until a promotion went live and support started getting calls that the checkout total did not match the advertised price, the page was reading a view refreshed before the price change, and checkout was reading the base table.
The refresh had also been failing for two hours after a schema change, and because cron mailed the error to an unread alias, "stale" had quietly become "stale by hours" rather than "stale by minutes".
Two changes fixed the class of problem, not just the instance:
the page now shows prices from the same source checkout uses (correctness before speed), and the materialized view carries a refreshed_at column that the health check compares against now(), so a refresh that stops running is an alert rather than a rumour.

-- pause --
Approximate distinct counts.

COUNT(DISTINCT user_id) over a very large set is the aggregate most worth approximating, because its cost is exactly the thing that cannot be streamed: remembering every value seen.

HyperLogLog is the standard answer.
Hash each value, and use the position of the first 1-bit in the hash to estimate cardinality, a value whose hash starts with k zeros turns up roughly once every 2k distinct values, then split the input across m registers by the leading hash bits and combine the per-register maxima.
The result is a fixed-size sketch, a few kilobytes, whose relative accuracy is 1.04/√m (Flajolet, Fusy, Gandouet and Meunier, HyperLogLog: the analysis of a near-optimal cardinality estimation algorithm, 2007).
Two properties matter in practice: memory does not grow with cardinality, and sketches merge, the union of two sketches is the sketch of the union, so daily sketches can produce a correct-to-within-the-error monthly unique count, which raw daily counts cannot.

sequel Server 2019+ has it built in as APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT(expr), returning bigint.
Microsoft's documented guarantee:
"The function implementation guarantees up to a 2% error rate within a 97% probability." The docs position it for "data sets that are millions of rows or higher" with high-cardinality columns, and note it is "less likely to spill memory to disk compared to a precise COUNT DISTINCT operation".
Postgres Q L has no built-in approximate distinct count. It comes from an extension, postgresql-hll, which adds an hll column type you can store and union, or Apache DataSketches' Postgres Q L extension.
Storing the sketch is the point: it is what lets tomorrow's dashboard answer a question over a range nobody pre-computed.

Use it where the number is directional, unique visitors, cardinality checks before designing an index, "roughly how many distinct devices". Never where the number is a count of things people are paid or billed for.

-- pause --
Which aggregates roll up, distributive, algebraic, holistic.

Several rules already on this page are the same rule wearing different clothes: why AVG parallelizes but COUNT(DISTINCT) doesn't, why an indexed view must contain COUNT_BIG(*) and may not contain AVG, why daily unique-user counts can't be summed into a monthly one.
The classification that explains all of them comes from the paper that introduced CUBE to sequel, Gray, Chaudhuri, Bosworth, Layman, Reichart, Venkatrao, Pellow and Pirahesh, Data Cube: A Relational Aggregation Operator Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals (1997):

Distributive, the aggregate over a set can be computed from the aggregates over its disjoint subsets, SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX, Yes, one running value per partition.
Algebraic, computable from a fixed number of distributive sub-aggregates, AVG (= SUM / COUNT ), STDDEV, VAR, regression functions, Yes, carry the tuple, not the answer.
Holistic, no constant bound on the size of the intermediate state, COUNT(DISTINCT), MEDIAN / PERCENTILE_CONT, MODE, No, the intermediate state is the set.

Everything else follows from the last column.

Parallelism. A parallel plan splits rows across workers and combines their partial results. SUM combines by adding.
AVG combines by carrying (sum, count) per worker and dividing once at the end, that is what makes it algebraic, and why the plan can show Partial HashAggregate under a Gather for an average.
COUNT(DISTINCT) has no such tuple: the partial result is the set of values seen, so the partials have to be merged as sets.

Pre-aggregation. A summary table can only hold measures you can re-combine later. daily_revenue(day, gross, order_count) rolls up to a week, a month or a quarter by summing two columns. daily_revenue(day, avg_order_value) rolls up to nothing at all:

The mean of the means weights Tuesday's single order as heavily as Monday's hundred. Store SUM and COUNT; divide at read time.
The same rule applies one level up: AVG(daily_avg) in a dashboard, orders.Average() over a list of per-customer averages in C sharp, and AVG in a rolled-up materialized view are all the same mistake.

Incremental maintenance is stricter than distributivity. MIN / MAX are distributive, you can combine partial maxima, but they cannot be maintained incrementally under deletion, because deleting the current maximum row means re-reading the group to find the new one.
That asymmetry is exactly why sequel Server's indexed views allow SUM (adjustable by a delta on every insert, update and delete) and forbid MIN / MAX, and why they require COUNT_BIG(*): without it the engine cannot tell when a group has become empty and the row should disappear.

Weighted rollups. When the measure is a ratio, conversion rate, error rate, margin, never average the ratios. Store the numerator and the denominator as separate distributive columns and divide at the end. SUM(errors) / SUM(requests) is the error rate; AVG(error_rate) is a number with no meaning.

In the real world: a support dashboard reported "average handling time by region" from a daily summary table that stored a per-region average. The quarterly board number was produced by averaging the daily averages, and it looked stable and healthy.
It was neither: a region processing forty tickets on a quiet Sunday contributed exactly as much to the quarter as a region processing forty thousand on a Monday, so the reported figure tracked the small regions. Nobody caught it from the chart, because a wrong average still looks like an average.
It surfaced when a team lead added up the raw ticket durations for their own region and got a materially different number.
The rebuild stored sum_handling_seconds and ticket_count per region per day, and every consumer divided at read time, the summary table now held only distributive measures, and every rollup became a SUM.

In the real world: a payments team's "authorisation success rate by acquirer" panel averaged the per-day rates.
During an outage one acquirer processed eleven transactions in a day and failed nine of them; that day contributed an 18% rate with the same weight as a normal day's two million transactions, and the monthly rate on the panel dropped by far more than the incident had actually cost.
The number went into a contractual review with the acquirer before anyone rechecked it. Rates are ratios of two distributive measures, and the panel had been storing the ratio.

-- pause --
The grouping key is a comparison, collation, case, NULLs.

GROUP BY puts two rows in the same group when their keys compare equal. That comparison is not byte equality, and it is not the same on every engine, which makes the row count of a grouped query a portability question.

NULLs group together. NULL = NULL is UNKNOWN in a WHERE clause, but grouping does not use =; it uses the standard's "not distinct" notion, under which two NULLs belong together.
Microsoft states it plainly: "If a grouping column contains NULL values, the Database Engine treats all NULL values as equal and collects them into a single group." Postgres Q L and MySQL behave the same way.
So GROUP BY country over customers with no country gives you one NULL bucket, usually what you want, occasionally a silent merge of "unknown" records that a reader reads as a real category. And after ROLLUP / CUBE you can no longer tell that bucket from a subtotal row without GROUPING().

Strings group under the column's collation. The three defaults disagree on both axes that matter:

sequel Server, server collation, commonly SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS ( _CI = case-insensitive), 'ACME' and 'Acme' in one group, Ignored, 'abc' and 'abc ' in one group.
MySQL 8, utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci, "based on UCA 9.0.0 and CLDR v30, is accent-insensitive and case-insensitive", one group, and 'café' groups with 'cafe', Significant, UCA 9.0.0 collations are NO PAD, and " NO PAD collations treat trailing spaces as significant in comparisons,
like any other character".
Postgres Q L, the database's collation, which is deterministic, 'ACME' and 'Acme' are two groups, Significant.

The sequel Server padding rule is not a quirk but the standard: the engine "follows the ANSI or ISO sequel-92 specification (Section 8.2, Comparison Predicate,
General rules #3) on how to compare strings with spaces. Transact-sequel considers the strings 'abc' and 'abc ' to be equivalent for most comparison operations." MySQL 8's newer collations deliberately went the other way.
Postgres Q L can be told to behave like the other two, nondeterministic ICU collations arrived in Postgres Q L 12, listed in the release notes as "Nondeterministic ICU collations,
enabling case-insensitive and accent-insensitive grouping and ordering", but the docs warn that "their use leads to a performance penalty", that B-tree deduplication is unavailable on indexes using them, and that some pattern-matching operations are not possible.
The older, narrower alternative is the citext type.

Three consequences:

The same query returns a different number of rows on different engines. A migration that changes engine, or a database restored with a different collation, changes the cardinality of every grouped report over a string key. No error is raised.
Which spelling appears in the output is not specified by the query. Group by a case-insensitive column and the engine returns one representative from {'ACME', 'Acme', 'acme'}; nothing in the sequel says which. If you need a canonical form, say so: GROUP BY lower(name), or select MIN(name) alongside.
An index only supplies grouping order for its own collation. An index built under collation A cannot deliver ordered input for a GROUP BY. COLLATE B, so the plan grows a Sort, the same effect as grouping on an expression.

The durable fix is to make the key explicit instead of inheriting it from the collation: normalise once ( lower(btrim(email)) ), store or index that expression, and group on it. Then the grouping is defined by your code and behaves identically everywhere.

In the real world: a customer-deduplication job ran SELECT email, COUNT() FROM users GROUP BY email HAVING COUNT() > 1 against a sequel Server staging copy and reported several thousand duplicate email groups.
The same script against the Postgres Q L production replica reported far fewer, and the two teams spent a week arguing about which extract was corrupt. Neither was: sequel Server's case-insensitive collation had been collapsing Bob@x.com with bob@x.com, and Postgres Q L had not.
The number of duplicates was a property of the collation, not of the data. They settled it by defining the identity key in one place, lower(btrim(email)), creating an index on that expression, and grouping on it on both systems.

In the real world: a CSV importer had been writing country codes with a trailing space for years ( 'gigabytes ' ), and nobody knew, because on sequel Server 'gigabytes' and 'gigabytes ' group together under sequel-92 padding and every report looked right.
After the move to Postgres Q L the revenue-by-country report grew a second, half-sized gigabytes row, and the first instinct was that the migration had duplicated data. It had not, the migration had stopped hiding a four-year-old import bug.
The lasting change was a CHECK (country = btrim(country)) constraint on the column, so the next importer that does it fails at the write instead of at the report.

-- pause --
Ordering, limiting, and Top-N over groups.

LIMIT / TOP / FETCH bounds the number of rows you receive. It does not bound the aggregation, and confusing the two is behind a whole family of "but I only asked for ten rows" incidents.

To know the top ten spenders the engine must finish the sum for every customer, the very last row read could belong to the customer who ends up first. So the scan, the grouping, and the memory for the hash table are all unaffected by the LIMIT.
What the limit does buy is a bounded sort: the sort keeps only the best ten rows.
Postgres Q L reports that in EXPLAIN (ANALYZE) as Sort Method: top-N heapsort; sequel Server uses a distinct showplan operator, TopN Sort, documented as "similar to the Sort iterator, except that only the first N rows are needed, and not the entire result set".
That saves the sort's memory, not the aggregate's.

Contrast the case where the order is the grouping key:

MySQL has one more early-exit worth knowing, and it applies to deduplication rather than aggregation: "When combining LIMIT row_count with DISTINCT, MySQL stops as soon as it finds row_count unique rows." A GROUP BY carrying aggregates can never do that.

Pagination over an aggregate is the version of this that reaches production. ORDER BY SUM(.) DESC OFFSET 200 LIMIT 20 re-aggregates the entire table to produce page eleven, and it does it again for page twelve.
Keyset pagination, the usual cure for deep OFFSET, does not help either, because the sort key is a computed aggregate that exists nowhere on disk, so there is no index to seek into.
The answers, in order: filter first ( HAVING and a date range shrink what has to be sorted, though not what has to be grouped); materialise the ranked result once into a table or temp table with a stored rank column and paginate on that; or pre-aggregate the measure so each page is a cheap read.

In the real world: a partner portal had a "top merchants by volume" leaderboard, paged twenty at a time, backed by GROUP BY merchant_id ORDER BY SUM(amount) DESC with OFFSET / FETCH. It was fast in every test and in production, because page one was cached and nobody went further.
During a quarterly review an analyst clicked through to page forty; each click re-aggregated the whole payments table, the query took the connection pool's whole budget, and checkout latency spiked for the duration.
The endpoint was rewritten to compute the ranked list once into a merchant_rank(rank, merchant_id, volume, computed_at) table on a schedule, with pages served by WHERE rank BETWEEN:a AND:b.
The interesting part is the class of bug: the query wasn't slow, it was linear in the table and independent of the page size, and only a usage pattern nobody tested exposed it.

-- pause --
Aggregating from dot NET, what E F Core actually sends.

Most of the aggregates a senior dot NET engineer ships are written in link, and the interesting failures are in the gap between link's semantics and sequel's.

What translates. E F Core turns a GroupBy into sequel GROUP BY only when what you project is the key plus scalar aggregates, and an aggregate predicate becomes HAVING.
The documentation states the constraint and the reason: "Since no database structure can represent an IGrouping, GroupBy operators have no translation in most cases.
When an aggregate operator is applied to each group, which returns a scalar, it can be translated to sequel GROUP BY in relational databases."

What compiles, runs, returns the right answer, and reads the whole table. If GroupBy is the final operator, you want the groups themselves, not scalars, there is nothing to translate. Before E F Core 7 that threw as untranslatable (tracked as dotnet or efcore#19929).
Since 7.0 it succeeds, by doing the grouping on the client: "In this case, the GroupBy operator doesn't translate directly to a GROUP BY clause in the sequel, but instead,
E F Core creates the groupings after the results are returned from the server." The sequel for context.Books.GroupBy(s goes to s.Price) is SELECT [b].[Price], [b].[Id], [b].[AuthorId] FROM [Books] AS [b] ORDER BY [b].[Price], every row, every projected column, over the wire.
Correct results; memory proportional to the table.

Any() versus Count() > 0. They compile to different shapes: Any() becomes EXISTS (SELECT 1. ), which the engine may stop evaluating at the first matching row; Count() > 0 becomes an aggregate that has to finish before the comparison happens.
That is the mechanism, and it is the reason to prefer AnyAsync for existence checks.
It is not a universal speed law, dotnet or efcore#27953 is a reported case where rewriting Count() == 0 as !Any() inside a grouped projection made things worse, because the EXISTS became a correlated subquery evaluated per group while the COUNT(*) was already being computed by the GROUP BY.
Check the generated sequel; the rule to carry is " EXISTS can stop early, COUNT cannot", not " Any is faster".

The empty-set mismatch is the one that bites. sequel and link-to-Objects disagree about aggregates over nothing:

SUM, NULL, 0.
MAX / MIN, NULL, throws InvalidOperationException (non-nullable overloads).
AVG, NULL, throws InvalidOperationException (non-nullable overloads).
COUNT, 0, 0.

The provider has to paper over that, and where exactly it injects the COALESCE has moved between versions and been argued over in the tracker for years (dotnet or efcore#17492, #28158, #35950). Don't rely on it: project to a nullable and coalesce yourself, Sum(x goes to (decimal?)x.Total) ??
0m, or write the aggregate in sequel with an explicit COALESCE. The same discipline applies to Max() on a filtered set that might be empty.

Return types. The provider decides, and the two documentation pages read differently.
The provider-agnostic table in Complex query operators lists both Count() and LongCount() against COUNT(); the sequel Server provider's own function-mapping page is more specific and maps group.Count() to COUNT() and group.LongCount() to COUNT_BIG(*).
So on sequel Server, LongCount() does avoid the int overflow described, but the guarantee comes from the provider, not from link, so on any other provider read the generated sequel before assuming a 64-bit count on the server.

In the real world: a health endpoint on a busy service ran if (db.Orders.Count(o goes to o.Status == "Pending") > 0), a SELECT COUNT(*) over a large filtered set, executed by every pod on every probe interval.
The pending set was small but the index scan to count it was not free, and at thirty pods with a five-second probe the database was answering it thousands of times a minute for a boolean. Switching to AnyAsync produced an EXISTS, which the same index satisfies by finding one row and stopping.
Nothing about the endpoint's behaviour changed; the query simply stopped asking a question ("how many?") whose answer was thrown away.

In the real world: a reporting endpoint was written as db.Orders.GroupBy(o goes to o.CustomerId).ToList() followed by link aggregation in memory. On E F Core 6 it threw "could not be translated", the developer rewrote it as a translatable GroupBy. select new { Key, Sum }, and that was that.
After the E F Core 7 upgrade someone reintroduced the original shape in a new endpoint, and it worked, because 7.0 added client-side grouping.
It stayed in for two releases, silently pulling the whole Orders table into the web tier on every call, until a memory alert during a traffic peak led back to it.
The lesson is uncomfortable and worth saying out loud in an interview: E F Core 7 turned a loud failure into a quiet one, so "it compiles and the numbers are right" stopped being evidence that the query is sane.
Log the sequel ( LogTo, or the Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Database.Command category) and read it.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

-- pause --
"Top spenders per country", combining GROUP BY + HAVING + ORDER BY.

Reads as: "Per country, per customer, sum and count their orders since 2025; keep only those who spent > $5k; sort by country then spend."

-- pause --
Conditional aggregation, KPI dashboard query.

One query, five KPIs. Saves five round-trips to the DB and reads the data once.

-- pause --
Apdex-like query, fraction of fast requests.

1.0 * forces non-integer division; without it, int / int truncates and the answer is always 0 or 1. Note what type you get: a bare 1.0 literal is numeric in Postgres Q L and decimal in sequel Server, so the result is exact decimal, not floating point. Cast explicitly (:float8, CAST(.
AS float) ) if float is what you actually want.

-- pause --
COUNT(*) versus COUNT(col) versus COUNT(DISTINCT col).

Use:
COUNT(*) for row count.
COUNT(col) to skip NULLs.
COUNT(DISTINCT col) for cardinality.

-- pause --
Multi-window stats per group.

Each metric is its own aggregate; one pass over the table.

-- pause --
Simulating PIVOT with conditional aggregation.

This is the portable approach. T sequel's PIVOT operator is more concise but vendor-specific.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

Mixing aggregated and non-aggregated columns without GROUP BY. Standard sequel forbids this; older MySQL allowed it (returning indeterminate values). Always group every non-aggregated column.
Using HAVING for row-level filters. HAVING age > 18 works but performs a useless aggregation. Use WHERE age > 18 to filter rows pre-grouping.
Using WHERE for aggregate filters. WHERE COUNT(*) > 5 doesn't work, aggregates aren't computed yet. Use HAVING.
* COUNT() thinking it counts non-NULL.** It counts rows. For non-NULL count of a column, COUNT(col).
SUM(NULL) == 0? No, SUM returns NULL when all input is NULL. Use COALESCE(SUM(col), 0) for "default zero."
Integer division in averages. SUM(int_col) / COUNT(*) truncates. Cast first or multiply by 1.0. Engine difference: sequel Server's AVG over an int column returns int and truncates too ( AVG(rating) of 3 and 4 gives 3); Postgres Q L's avg(int) returns numeric and doesn't.
COUNT(DISTINCT col) on huge data without index. Requires a sort or a hash table sized by distinct values, and it can't stream.
Consider approximate cardinality, APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT on sequel Server 2019+, or the postgresql-hll / Apache DataSketches extensions on Postgres Q L, which has no built-in approximate distinct count.
String aggregation length truncation. Some dialects cap STRING_AGG / GROUP_CONCAT output. MySQL's default group_concat_max_len is 1024; raise if needed.
Multiplying via JOIN before GROUP BY. Joining to many-side table multiplies rows; per-customer SUM is now wrong (counted once per related row). Aggregate in a subquery first.
Forgetting NULL groups. GROUP BY treats NULL as a single group. Customers with country = NULL form one bucket. May be desired or surprising.
CUBE / ROLLUP results indistinguishable from real NULL. Use GROUPING(col) to differentiate.
DISTINCT after aggregation when GROUP BY would do. Often, GROUP BY is more efficient than SELECT DISTINCT over the same query.
* COUNT() on the preserved side of an OUTER JOIN.* A parent row with no children still produces one row, so COUNT() returns 1 where the answer is 0. Count a column from the optional side: COUNT(child.id).
Assuming GROUP BY returns rows in order. A hash aggregate emits groups in bucket order and the plan can flip as the data grows. MySQL removed its incidental sorting in 8.0. Write ORDER BY.
Aggregate return types overflowing. sequel Server's COUNT returns int and raises Msg 8115, Arithmetic overflow past 2,147,483,647, use COUNT_BIG. SUM(int) stays int in sequel Server (cast to BIGINT first) but is promoted to bigint in Postgres Q L.
Grouping on an expression, keeping the plain index. GROUP BY DATE_TRUNC('month', created_at) cannot use an index on created_at. Index the expression (Postgres Q L: the expression must be IMMUTABLE ), or a PERSISTED computed column on sequel Server.
NOLOCK on a reporting aggregate. It does not just permit dirty reads: rows can be counted twice or skipped entirely as data moves during the scan, so the total is wrong by an unknown amount with no error raised. Use row versioning (RCSI / SNAPSHOT ) or a replica.
Averaging averages. AVG is algebraic, not distributive: the mean of per-group means weights a group of 1 like a group of 10,000. Store SUM and COUNT in summary tables and divide at read time; for ratios, store numerator and denominator.
Assuming the grouping key is byte equality. It is a comparison under the column's collation.
sequel Server's usual default is case-insensitive and ignores trailing spaces; MySQL 8's default is case- and accent-insensitive but treats trailing spaces as significant; Postgres Q L's default is deterministic.
The same GROUP BY returns a different number of rows on each. Normalise the key ( lower(btrim(x)) ) and index that expression.
Expecting LIMIT to make a grouped Top-N cheap. Every group must be aggregated before any can be ranked; the limit only bounds the sort ( top-N heapsort / TopN Sort ).
OFFSET pagination over an aggregate re-aggregates the whole table per page, and keyset pagination can't help because the sort key isn't stored anywhere.
GroupBy as the final operator in E F Core 7+. It no longer throws, it groups on the client, after selecting every row and column with an ORDER BY on the key. Correct answers, memory proportional to the table. Project key + aggregates instead, and read the generated sequel.
Over-wide CUBE on sequel Server. The maximum is 32 expressions and 4,096 grouping sets, and duplicate sets are not consolidated, GROUPING SETS ((), CUBE(a, b)) emits the grand total twice.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Aggregate functions: COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, MAX, STRING_AGG / GROUP_CONCAT.
GROUP BY collapses rows by group columns. All non-aggregated columns must be in GROUP BY (per standard sequel).
WHERE filters rows; HAVING filters groups. Aggregates only valid in HAVING / SELECT / ORDER BY.
* COUNT() counts rows (NULLs included). COUNT(col) skips NULL. COUNT(DISTINCT col) ** = unique count.
Conditional aggregation ( SUM(CASE WHEN.) ) replaces vendor-specific PIVOT.
ROLLUP / CUBE / GROUPING SETS for multi-level subtotals in one query.

Expected interview questions:

"WHERE versus HAVING?", WHERE filters rows pre-grouping. HAVING filters groups post-aggregation. Aggregate functions can't appear in WHERE.
"Find customers with more than 5 orders.", SELECT customer_id FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id HAVING COUNT(*) > 5;
"How would you find duplicates?", SELECT col, COUNT() FROM t GROUP BY col HAVING COUNT() > 1;
" COUNT() versus COUNT(col) versus COUNT(DISTINCT col) ?"*, Total rows / non-NULL count / unique non-NULL count.
"Calculate average order value, ignoring cancelled orders.", SELECT AVG(total) FROM orders WHERE status <> 'Cancelled'; or SELECT AVG(CASE WHEN status <> 'Cancelled' THEN total END) FROM orders; (CASE returns NULL for cancelled; AVG ignores NULL).
"Pivot months across columns.", Conditional aggregation: SUM(CASE WHEN month = 'Jan' THEN sales END) AS jan,..
"What's ROLLUP ?", Generates hierarchical subtotals: per-key + intermediate aggregates + grand total in one query. (Engine note: MySQL has ROLLUP only, no CUBE, no GROUPING SETS.)
"How does the engine actually execute a GROUP BY?", Hash aggregate (one accumulator per group in a hash table, memory proportional to group count, output unordered) or stream or sort aggregate (input already ordered by the key, constant memory, output ordered).
The optimizer picks on estimated group count and whether an index already supplies the order.
"This grouped report got slow after the table grew. How do you diagnose it?", Read the actual plan. Which aggregate operator? Did it spill (Postgres Q L: Batches / Disk Usage on the HashAggregate, Sort Method: external merge; sequel Server: the spill-to- tempdb warning)?
Compare estimated versus actual rows on the aggregate, a bad multi-column group estimate is the usual root cause, fixed with extended or multi-column statistics. Then ask whether an index can supply order and coverage, and whether the result should be pre-aggregated at all.
"Why is SELECT COUNT() slow on a large table?"*, Because it isn't metadata. Postgres Q L and InnoDB must check per-row visibility against your snapshot; sequel Server scans the narrowest covering index.
If an estimate is acceptable, read pg_class.reltuples or sys dm db partition stats row count instead.
"How do you stop a reporting query blocking production?", Replica first.
Otherwise row versioning (RCSI or SNAPSHOT on sequel Server; Postgres Q L and InnoDB readers already don't block writers), a covering index or a pre-aggregated table to make it cheap, and NOLOCK never, it can double-count or skip rows silently.
"Which aggregates can you pre-compute and roll up, and which can't?", Distributive ones ( SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX ) combine from partial results. Algebraic ones ( AVG, STDDEV ) combine if you carry the components, store SUM and COUNT, divide at read.
Holistic ones ( COUNT(DISTINCT), median, mode) have unbounded intermediate state and cannot be combined at all; approximate them with a mergeable sketch or recompute. Gray et al.'s data-cube taxonomy, and it also explains why indexed views require COUNT_BIG(*) and forbid AVG and MIN / MAX.
"Same GROUP BY country on sequel Server and Postgres Q L, different row counts. Why?", Grouping compares keys under the column's collation.
sequel Server's typical default is case-insensitive and pads trailing spaces per sequel-92, so 'gigabytes', 'gb' and 'gigabytes ' collapse into one group; Postgres Q L's default collation is deterministic and keeps them apart; MySQL 8's utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci is case- and accent-insensitive but NO PAD.
NULLs form a single group on all three. Fix by normalising the key explicitly and indexing that expression.
" GROUP BY x ORDER BY SUM(y) DESC LIMIT 10, does the limit make it cheaper?", Barely.
Every group has to be finished before any can be ranked, so the scan and the aggregate are unchanged; the limit only bounds the sort ( Sort Method: top-N heapsort in Postgres Q L, the TopN Sort operator in sequel Server). Paginating with OFFSET re-runs the whole aggregation per page.
Materialise the ranked list, or pre-aggregate the measure.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, GROUP BY rules.

Q: Why does SELECT customer_id, name, COUNT(*) FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id fail in standard sequel?-- think --

A: The "every non-aggregated column must be in GROUP BY" rule. name is neither aggregated nor in GROUP BY, the engine doesn't know which name to return for a group with multiple rows. Standard sequel rejects it. Old MySQL (non-strict mode) would return an indeterminate value silently.

Cross-Q: Why does it work in Postgres even though name isn't in GROUP BY?-- think --

A: Postgres allows it when name is functionally dependent on the GROUP BY column, concretely, when customer_id is the primary key of the customers table, which is the only case Postgres recognizes (its docs say so explicitly).
This is optional feature T301 of sequel:1999; MySQL does the same detection under ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY and goes further, also accepting a UNIQUE NOT NULL key. sequel Server does not, it rejects the query with error 8120, and neither does Oracle. Portable code lists every column.

Cross-Q²: What's the cost of writing portable GROUP BY?-- think --

A: Trivial, just list every non-aggregated SELECT column in GROUP BY. The query reads slightly longer; the plan is identical (the optimizer knows about functional dependencies even when you spell them out). Portability win: query runs on any RDBMS.
The only "gotcha" is that adding a non-aggregated column to SELECT later silently requires updating GROUP BY too, your test suite catches this.

-- pause --
Drill 2, HAVING versus WHERE.

Q: When does HAVING differ from WHERE in practice?-- think --

A: WHERE filters rows before grouping; HAVING filters groups after aggregation. Aggregates can only appear in HAVING or SELECT or ORDER BY. Example: WHERE age > 18 (row predicate, filter early) versus HAVING COUNT(*) > 5 (group predicate, filter after aggregation).

Cross-Q: I write HAVING age > 18 and it works. Should I have used WHERE?-- think --

A: Yes. Logically the engine groups every row first, including the under-18 seconds, then drops the groups, so the aggregation is fed rows it will discard, and the penalty scales with how many of them there are.
(Postgres Q L's planner actually rescues you here: an aggregate-free HAVING qual is moved into WHERE in subquery_planner. Don't rely on that elsewhere, and don't rely on the reader knowing it.) Rule: predicates referencing only row-level columns to WHERE; predicates on aggregates to HAVING.
And check the semantics when you move one, WHERE created_at >=:d. HAVING COUNT() > 5 and HAVING COUNT() > 5 AND MAX(created_at) >=:d are different questions.

Cross-Q²: Can WHERE contain an aggregate via a subquery?-- think --

A: Yes, WHERE total > (SELECT AVG(total) FROM orders). The subquery is computed once (non-correlated), and the outer WHERE compares row values to the scalar result. This is row-level filtering using an aggregate from elsewhere, not aggregating the current row's group.
Distinct from HAVING SUM(total) > 100 which aggregates the current group's rows.

-- pause --
Drill 3, GROUPING SETS / ROLLUP / CUBE.

Q: What does ROLLUP add over plain GROUP BY?-- think --

A: Subtotals at every level of the column hierarchy, plus a grand total, in one query. GROUP BY ROLLUP (country, status) returns: each (country, status) group + each country subtotal (status NULL) + the grand total (both NULL).
Equivalent to a series of UNION ALL'd GROUP BYs but executed in one pass.

Cross-Q: How is CUBE different?-- think --

A: CUBE gives every combination of subtotals, for two columns, that's (country, status), (country), (status), and () (grand total). ROLLUP only goes left-to-right hierarchically: (country, status) to (country) to (), missing the (status) aggregate.
Use CUBE when every cross-section is interesting; ROLLUP when there's a clear drill-down hierarchy.

Cross-Q²: How do you tell "subtotal NULL" apart from a real NULL in your data?-- think --

A: GROUPING(col) returns 1 if the row is a subtotal-NULL, 0 if it's a real value (including a real NULL). Wrap with CASE: CASE WHEN GROUPING(country) = 1 THEN 'TOTAL' ELSE country END.
Without GROUPING, you can't distinguish "country = NULL because it's the grand total row" from "country = NULL because some customers have no country", they look identical in the result.

-- pause --
Drill 4, NULL handling in aggregates.

Q: How does COUNT(*) differ from COUNT(col) ?-- think --

A: COUNT() counts rows (NULLs included). COUNT(col) counts rows where col IS NOT NULL. So SELECT COUNT(), COUNT(email) FROM users on a table where 30% of users have NULL email returns total_rows and 70%*total_rows.

Cross-Q: What's the gotcha with SUM on all-NULL input?-- think --

A: SUM returns NULL, not 0. SELECT SUM(amount) FROM payments WHERE customer_id = 999 (no rows) returns NULL, the entire scalar is NULL. Code that does arithmetic on the result blows up: revenue - SUM(refunds) becomes NULL. Defensive: COALESCE(SUM(amount), 0) returns 0 for empty or all-NULL input.

Cross-Q²: Does AVG(col) divide by COUNT(*) or COUNT(col) ?-- think --

A: COUNT(col), the count of non-NULL values. AVG ignores NULLs in both numerator and denominator. So AVG(rating) on a table where 80% of rating is NULL averages only the 20% non-NULL values, not 80% of (rating-sum / total-rows).
This is usually what you want, but it's worth knowing if "average rating across all users (including 0 for unrated)" is your intent, then use COALESCE(rating, 0) first or SUM(rating)/COUNT(*).

-- pause --
Drill 5, DISTINCT versus GROUP BY.

Q: SELECT DISTINCT customer_id FROM orders versus SELECT customer_id FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id, same result?-- think --

A: Yes, identical result set. Both produce unique customer_ids. Most modern optimizers also produce identical plans, both hash-dedupe or sort-dedupe the values.

Cross-Q: Why might performance differ on some engines?-- think --

A: Rarely, and not for the reason folklore gives.
MySQL's manual is explicit that the two are the same problem, "In most cases, a DISTINCT clause can be considered as a special case of GROUP BY ", and that "the optimizations applicable to GROUP BY queries can be also applied to queries with a DISTINCT clause",
so the loose index scan is available to both.
Where they genuinely diverge is LIMIT: the same manual notes that "when combining LIMIT row_count with DISTINCT, MySQL stops as soon as it finds row_count unique rows", which a GROUP BY carrying aggregates cannot do because every group must be finished before any of them is correct.
Verify with EXPLAIN if you care; otherwise either form is fine.

Cross-Q²: When is DISTINCT clearly wrong?-- think --

A: When it's masking a join bug. SELECT DISTINCT customer_id FROM orders o JOIN order_items oi ON. returns unique customers, but if you expected one row per customer, the JOIN is creating duplicates, DISTINCT hides the multiplication. Investigate first: is the JOIN shape right?
Should it be a semi-join ( EXISTS )? DISTINCT after a multi-row JOIN often indicates "I should have written EXISTS."

-- pause --
Drill 6, ALL keyword.

Q: What does COUNT(ALL col) mean?-- think --

A: ALL is the default, counts every non-NULL value including duplicates. COUNT(ALL col) ≡ COUNT(col). Same for SUM(ALL col) ≡ SUM(col). It exists for explicitness when contrasting with DISTINCT: COUNT(DISTINCT col) is unique, COUNT(ALL col) is everything.

Cross-Q: When do you actually see ALL used?-- think --

A: Almost never. It's mostly a sequel-standard formality. The exception is UNION ALL versus UNION DISTINCT, there ALL is non-default (UNION defaults to DISTINCT, UNION ALL is opt-in). In aggregates, ALL is implicit, so it's redundant. You'll see it in formal sequel textbooks more than in real code.

Cross-Q²: Does ALL change the plan?-- think --

A: No, the optimizer treats COUNT(ALL col) and COUNT(col) identically. Both compile to the same operator. ALL is syntactic noise that some style guides accept and others forbid for clarity.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Filtered aggregates with CASE.

Q: How do you count "orders with status = 'Cancelled'" in the same query as total order count?-- think --

A: Conditional aggregation: SUM(CASE WHEN status = 'Cancelled' THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS cancelled, COUNT(*) AS total FROM orders. The CASE returns 1 for matching rows and 0 otherwise; SUM totals them. Single pass over the table.

Cross-Q: Postgres has a cleaner syntax, FILTER. Show me.-- think --

A: COUNT() FILTER (WHERE status = 'Cancelled') AS cancelled, COUNT() AS total FROM orders. The FILTER clause restricts which rows feed into each aggregate. Cleaner than CASE for readability; same plan in Postgres.
It is standard sequel, sequel:2003, optional feature T612, but thinly implemented: Postgres Q L (9.4+) and SQLite have it; sequel Server does not, including in the 2025 release, whose new aggregate surface added PRODUCT and JSON_ARRAYAGG but no FILTER.
The CASE form is the portable fallback, and the one to write in code that has to run on both.

Cross-Q²: Is COUNT(CASE WHEN p THEN 1 END) equivalent to SUM(CASE WHEN p THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) ?-- think --

A: Yes, with the trick: COUNT ignores NULLs, so omitting ELSE makes non-matching rows produce NULL to not counted. COUNT(CASE WHEN status='X' THEN 1 END) is shorter and equivalent.
Three forms, SUM(CASE), COUNT(CASE without ELSE), and FILTER, all do the same thing; pick what your team finds readable.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Multi-aggregate single-pass.

Q: I need order_count, total_revenue, avg_order_value, and max_order in one report. One query or four?-- think --

A: One. SELECT COUNT(*), SUM(total), AVG(total), MAX(total) FROM orders WHERE created_at >= '2025-01-01'. The engine scans the table once and computes all four aggregates in a single pass.
Four separate queries scan the same rows four times, and each one pays the round-trip and the plan lookup as well.

Cross-Q: Does the optimizer rewrite four separate queries into one?-- think --

A: No, separate queries are separate plans, separate scans. The optimizer's scope is one statement at a time. Some application-layer ORMs or connection-pool tools can batch round-trips but won't merge the scans server-side.
If you control the sequel, combine the aggregates; if you can't (multiple consumers each calling their own aggregate query), consider materializing the source into a temp table once and querying it four times, temp table reads are cheap versus base table.

Cross-Q²: When does multi-aggregate hurt rather than help?-- think --

A: When the aggregates need different WHERE clauses, SUM(total) WHERE status='Paid' versus SUM(total) WHERE status='Refunded'.
You can express these via conditional aggregation ( SUM(CASE WHEN status='Paid' THEN total ELSE 0 END) ), but if the predicates are highly selective, scanning all rows to compute both is wasteful. Sometimes two indexed queries on selective filters beat one scan. Profile both.

-- pause --
Drill 9, FIRST_VALUE / LAST_VALUE alternatives.

Q: How do you get "the first order date per customer" in standard sequel without window functions?-- think --

A: MIN(created_at) per customer: SELECT customer_id, MIN(created_at) FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id. For temporal "first," MIN of the timestamp works. The result is the value of created_at, not the row containing it.

Cross-Q: What if I need the full row (every column) of the first order, not just the date?-- think --

A: Two patterns. (1) Self-join: SELECT o. FROM orders o JOIN (SELECT customer_id, MIN(created_at) AS first_dt FROM orders GROUP BY customer_id) f ON o.customer_id = f.customer_id AND o.created_at = f.first_dt.
(2) Window function: SELECT FROM (SELECT *, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY created_at) AS rn FROM orders) WHERE rn = 1. Window function is cleaner and handles ties (with ROW_NUMBER ); self-join can return multiple rows if created_at ties.

Cross-Q²: What's the gotcha with ties?-- think --

A: If two orders have the same created_at for one customer, the self-join returns both, sometimes desired, sometimes not. ROW_NUMBER picks one (deterministically if the ORDER BY has a tiebreaker like id ). RANK / DENSE_RANK would return both.
Be explicit about the tiebreaker; "first" is ambiguous without it. Document the rule: "first by created_at, breaking ties on id ascending."

-- pause --
Drill 10, Conditional sums for KPI dashboards.

Q: Show me a single query that computes today's total revenue, total refunds, and net revenue.-- think --

A: SELECT SUM(CASE WHEN type='Sale' THEN amount ELSE 0 END) AS revenue, SUM(CASE WHEN type='Refund' THEN amount ELSE 0 END) AS refunds, SUM(CASE WHEN type='Sale' THEN amount ELSE -amount END) AS net FROM transactions WHERE date = CURRENT_DATE. Three conditional sums, one scan.

Cross-Q: What if "refund" amounts are stored as negative numbers already?-- think --

A: Then net is just SUM(amount). Schema design matters: signed amounts simplify aggregation, unsigned + type column requires conditional logic. For audit or compliance, separate columns (amount + type) are often required so refunds can't be confused with negative sales.
Pick the model that matches your reporting needs.

Cross-Q²: How do you avoid integer overflow on a billion-row SUM?-- think --

A: Cast to a wider type before summing: SUM(amount:bigint) (Postgres) or SUM(CAST(amount AS BIGINT)) (sequel Server). If amount is INT (~2.1B max), and you're summing positive values, 1B rows times small average can overflow. Postgres SUM(int) to bigint automatically; sequel Server keeps the type.
Know your engine's promotion rules; when in doubt, cast.

-- pause --
Drill 11, COUNT(*) versus COUNT(1).

Q: Is COUNT(*) faster than COUNT(1) ?-- think --

A: No, they produce identical plans on every modern engine. Both count rows. The "COUNT(1) is faster" claim is a 1990 seconds myth based on Oracle's early parser behavior. Today, COUNT(1), COUNT(*), and COUNT('any-constant') all compile to the same operator.

Cross-Q: What about COUNT(column) for a NOT NULL column?-- think --

A: Logically equivalent to COUNT() (every row has a non-NULL value), but the optimizer must verify the column is non-NULL, usually trivial with constraint metadata. Plan should match COUNT().
The only meaningful distinction is COUNT(nullable_column) which actually filters NULLs, versus COUNT(*) which doesn't.

Cross-Q²: Why do you sometimes see SELECT COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT DISTINCT.) sub ?-- think --

A: Counting unique tuples. Engine support for the direct form varies: Postgres Q L takes a row constructor, COUNT(DISTINCT (col_a, col_b)); MySQL takes a list, COUNT(DISTINCT col_a, col_b); sequel Server accepts neither, so the subquery is the way to write it there.
Watch the NULL difference while you're at it, SELECT COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT DISTINCT col. ) counts a NULL group as one, while COUNT(DISTINCT col) ignores NULLs entirely, so on a column that actually contains at least one NULL the two forms differ by exactly one.

-- pause --
Drill 12, MEDIAN computation.

Q: Standard sequel doesn't have MEDIAN. How do you compute it?-- think --

A: PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY col), the standard "ordered-set" aggregate (Postgres, sequel Server 2012+, Oracle).
For older dialects: SELECT AVG(col) FROM (SELECT col, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY col) AS rn, COUNT(*) OVER () AS cnt FROM t) WHERE rn IN ((cnt+1)/2, (cnt+2)/2), picks the middle one (or two for even counts).

Cross-Q: What's the difference between PERCENTILE_CONT and PERCENTILE_DISC?-- think --

A: CONT (continuous) interpolates between values, for an even count, it averages the two middle values. DISC (discrete) picks one of the actual values, for an even count, the lower of the two middle ones.
For median on continuous data (salaries, durations), CONT is conventional; for categorical-ordered data (rankings, grades), DISC is more meaningful.

Cross-Q²: Why is median expensive?-- think --

A: It requires sorting or a quickselect, O(N log N) or O(N) respectively, neither streamable. SUM or AVG or COUNT are streaming aggregates (one pass, constant memory, and the row can be forgotten immediately).
MEDIAN has to materialize the whole set to find the middle, so its memory grows with the input and it spills.
Approximate quantile sketches (t-digest, KLL, extensions in Postgres Q L, built in to some analytics engines) hold a fixed-size summary instead; the trade is an error bound you choose in advance against memory that no longer depends on row count.
Quote the mechanism, not a speedup figure: the honest statement is "bounded memory and one pass, at a stated error tolerance".

-- pause --
Drill 13, MODE workaround.

Q: Standard sequel doesn't have MODE (most frequent value). How do you compute it?-- think --

A: SELECT col FROM t GROUP BY col ORDER BY COUNT() DESC LIMIT 1. Group by the column, sort groups by count descending, take the top one.
For ties, you get just the first arbitrarily; for "all modes," remove LIMIT and add HAVING COUNT() = (SELECT MAX(c) FROM (SELECT COUNT(*) AS c FROM t GROUP BY col) sub).

Cross-Q: Postgres has MODE() WITHIN GROUP. How does it work?-- think --

A: SELECT MODE() WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY col) FROM t, returns the most frequent value of col. Ordered-set aggregate, same family as PERCENTILE_CONT. Returns one value (ties broken by ORDER BY tiebreaker if specified, else arbitrarily). Concise but Postgres-only; the GROUP BY approach is portable.

Cross-Q²: For categorical data with millions of distinct values, what's the perf cost?-- think --

A: Grouping requires hashing or sorting every value, O(N) memory for hash or O(N log N) for sort. Plus a top-1 over the resulting groups, which is cheap. The dominant cost is the grouping.
For a high-cardinality column (millions of distinct values), the hash table fits poorly in memory; consider sampling or approximate-top-K algorithms (Misra-Gries, Space-Saving) if exact mode isn't required.

-- pause --
Drill 14, STRING_AGG / LISTAGG / GROUP_CONCAT.

Q: How do you produce a comma-separated list of order IDs per customer?-- think --

A: Depends on dialect. Postgres or sequel Server 2017+: STRING_AGG(order_id:text, ','). MySQL: GROUP_CONCAT(order_id SEPARATOR ','). Oracle: LISTAGG(order_id, ',') WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY order_id). Same concept, three syntaxes.

Cross-Q: What's the ordering guarantee?-- think --

A: None by default, the engine concatenates in whatever order rows arrive (often hash-bucket order, not source order). For deterministic output, add ORDER BY inside the aggregate: STRING_AGG(x, ',' ORDER BY x), GROUP_CONCAT(x ORDER BY x SEPARATOR ','), LISTAGG(x, ',') WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY x).
Without it, the same query can produce different strings across runs, flaky tests, mysterious diffs.

Cross-Q²: What's the length cap?-- think --

A: MySQL: group_concat_max_len, default 1024 bytes, session-settable, and it truncates silently (a warning is raised that most drivers never show you).
sequel Server: the return type follows the input type, so a plain varchar / nvarchar column gives varchar(8000) / nvarchar(4000) and overflow is a hard error 9829, "STRING_AGG aggregation result exceeded the limit of 8000 bytes.
Use LOB types to avoid result truncation", convert the input, STRING_AGG(CONVERT(NVARCHAR(MAX), col), ','), exactly as Microsoft's own examples do. Postgres Q L: text, bounded by the 1 gigabyte field limit, no practical cap here.
Oracle LISTAGG: VARCHAR2, so ORA-01489 past 4000 bytes unless you write ON OVERFLOW TRUNCATE (12.2+) or switch to XMLAGG. Two different failure modes, silent truncation and a hard error, and both only appear for your largest group, so seed the test data with one.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Top-N per group: windows versus aggregation.

Q: "Top 3 orders per customer by total", window function or GROUP BY?-- think --

A: Window function: SELECT FROM (SELECT, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY total DESC) AS rn FROM orders) WHERE rn <= 3. Cannot easily be done with GROUP BY alone, GROUP BY collapses rows; you'd lose the individual order details.

Cross-Q: When would APPLY or LATERAL beat the window function?-- think --

A: When N is small (1-10) and there's an index on (customer_id, total DESC). APPLY or LATERAL can seek that index once per customer and stop after N rows, work proportional to customers times N.
The window function has to read every order, number it, and then discard almost all of them, work proportional to total rows.
On 1M customers with 1000 orders each, that's roughly 3M rows touched versus 1B: the same asymptotic difference as an index seek versus a scan, which is why it matters here rather than any particular multiplier.
Measure it on your data; the point to make in the interview is why the two plans differ, not a number.

Cross-Q²: How do you handle ties, top 3 including all tied at position 3?-- think --

A: Use RANK() instead of ROW_NUMBER(): RANK() OVER (PARTITION BY customer_id ORDER BY total DESC) AS rk WHERE rk <= 3. RANK assigns the same value to ties, so all rows tied at rank 3 are included (you might get 4 or 5 rows back if there are ties).
DENSE_RANK is similar but doesn't skip rank numbers after ties. ROW_NUMBER arbitrarily breaks ties, deterministic count, arbitrary selection. Pick based on semantics: "include all tied" to RANK, "exactly N" to ROW_NUMBER + tiebreaker.

-- pause --
Drill 16, Rolling up a summary table.

Q: You have daily_stats(day, region, order_count, gross, avg_order_value, unique_customers). Which columns can you use to answer a monthly question?-- think --

A: order_count and gross, sum them. avg_order_value is unusable: AVG is algebraic, so the mean of daily means weights a quiet Sunday like a peak Monday. Compute it as SUM(gross) / SUM(order_count), which is why storing both components was the right call and storing the average was not.
unique_customers is holistic, a customer active on ten days contributes ten to the sum and one to the truth, so summing it gives an upper bound that grows with engagement, not a monthly figure. That column can only be recomputed over the month, or replaced by a mergeable HLL sketch.

Cross-Q: Where does that classification come from, and what else does it explain?-- think --

A: Gray et al.'s data-cube paper (1997): distributive ( SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX ) computable from sub-aggregates; algebraic ( AVG, STDDEV ) computable from a bounded set of distributive components; holistic ( COUNT(DISTINCT), median, mode) with unbounded intermediate state.
It's the same reason parallel plans can compute AVG as a (sum, count) pair per worker but struggle with COUNT(DISTINCT), and the reason sequel Server's indexed views permit SUM but not AVG.

Cross-Q²: MIN / MAX are distributive. Why does sequel Server still ban them in an indexed view with GROUP BY ?-- think --

A: Because incremental maintenance is a stricter requirement than distributivity. A SUM can be adjusted by a delta for every insert, update and delete without looking at other rows.
Deleting the row that currently holds the maximum tells you nothing about the new maximum, the engine would have to re-read the group. Same reason the view definition must contain COUNT_BIG(*): it is how the engine knows a group has emptied and its row must go.

-- pause --
Drill 17, Grouping keys and collation.

Q: SELECT email, COUNT() FROM users GROUP BY email HAVING COUNT() > 1 finds duplicates on your sequel Server staging box and almost none on the Postgres Q L replica. Same data. What happened?-- think --

A: Grouping compares keys under the column's collation, not byte-for-byte. sequel Server's common default ( SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS ) is case-insensitive, so Bob@x.com and bob@x.com land in one group.
Postgres Q L's default collation is deterministic, so they are two groups and neither is a "duplicate". The duplicate count was a property of the collation, not of the data.

Cross-Q: Any other axis where the two disagree?-- think --

A: Trailing spaces. sequel Server follows the sequel-92 padding rule, the docs say it "considers the strings 'abc' and 'abc ' to be equivalent for most comparison operations", so 'gigabytes' and 'gigabytes ' are one group. Postgres Q L treats them as different.
MySQL 8 splits the difference in a way that catches people twice: its default utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci is case- and accent-insensitive ( café groups with cafe ), but because UCA 9.0.0 collations are NO PAD, trailing spaces are significant there.

Cross-Q²: How do you make the grouping mean the same thing everywhere?-- think --

A: Stop inheriting the semantics from the collation and state them: group on lower(btrim(email)), and index that expression so the plan doesn't lose the grouping order (Postgres Q L expression index, sequel Server PERSISTED computed column, MySQL 8 functional index).
If you want case-insensitivity on Postgres Q L at the type level instead, citext or a nondeterministic ICU collation (12+) will do it, with the documented costs: "their use leads to a performance penalty", no B-tree deduplication, and some pattern-matching operations unavailable.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

WHERE versus HAVING: row-level filter before grouping; group-level filter after aggregation.
*COUNT() versus COUNT(col)**: total rows including NULL versus non-NULL values only.
COUNT(DISTINCT): forces a sort or hash on the column; expensive on big sets, consider HLL approximation.
SUM returns NULL on all-NULL input: wrap with COALESCE(SUM(x), 0) for "default zero".
Conditional aggregation: SUM(CASE WHEN p THEN 1 ELSE 0 END); portable pivot replacement.
GROUP BY rule: every non-aggregated column in SELECT must appear in GROUP BY (standard sequel).
ROLLUP / CUBE / GROUPING SETS: multi-level subtotals in one pass; use GROUPING() to label totals.
STRING_AGG / GROUP_CONCAT: collapse strings within a group; watch dialect-specific length caps.
JOIN before GROUP BY can multiply rows: pre-aggregate in a subquery to keep totals correct.
Integer division gotcha: SUM(int)/COUNT(*) rounds; cast to float or multiply by 1.0. sequel Server's AVG(int) truncates too; Postgres Q L's returns numeric.
Hash versus stream aggregate: hash = memory proportional to group count, output unordered; stream = ordered input, constant memory. HashAggregate / GroupAggregate (Postgres Q L), Hash Match (Aggregate) / Stream Aggregate (sequel Server).
Spills come from bad group-count estimates: Postgres Q L spills past work_mem times hash_mem_multiplier (13+); sequel Server's memory grant is fixed at compile time and spills to tempdb. Fix the statistics, not the memory knob.
* COUNT() after a LEFT JOIN returns 1 for childless parents**: count a column from the optional side.
GROUP BY does not order, write ORDER BY. MySQL removed its incidental sorting in 8.0.
Empty input: no GROUP BY to one row ( COUNT 0, SUM NULL); with GROUP BY to zero rows; HAVING without GROUP BY can delete the only row.
Reporting isolation: replica, or RCSI/ SNAPSHOT on sequel Server. NOLOCK can count rows twice or not at all.
Approximate distinct: APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT on sequel Server 2019+ ("up to a 2% error rate within a 97% probability"); Postgres Q L needs an extension ( postgresql-hll, DataSketches). Sketches merge, counts don't.
Distributive / algebraic / holistic (Gray et al. 1997): SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX roll up; AVG / STDDEV roll up only if you carry the components; COUNT(DISTINCT) /median or mode don't roll up at all. Summary tables store SUM and COUNT, never AVG.
Grouping key = comparison under the collation: sequel Server default typically case-insensitive and pads trailing spaces; MySQL 8 utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci case- and accent-insensitive but NO PAD; Postgres Q L deterministic. NULLs form one group everywhere. Normalise and index the expression.
LIMIT doesn't shrink a grouped Top-N: all groups must finish before ranking; the limit only bounds the sort. OFFSET paging re-aggregates per page, materialise the ranked list.
sequel Server grouping-set caps: 32 expressions, 4,096 sets, duplicates not consolidated.
E F Core: key + scalar aggregates to GROUP BY, aggregate predicate to HAVING; GroupBy as final operator groups on the client since 7.0; Any() to EXISTS (can stop early), Count() > 0 to aggregate (can't). sequel SUM of nothing is NULL, Enumerable.Sum of nothing is 0, coalesce deliberately.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Double-counted revenue from a bad join shape.

Problem: A finance dashboard shows monthly revenue 2.3 times what the accounting system shows. The query joins orders, order_items, and payments and SUMs order.total.

Diagnosis: The senior runs the query in psql with EXPLAIN ANALYZE and inspects sample output:

Order 12345 has total = 100, 3 items, and 2 payment attempts (one declined, one approved). The query produces 6 rows for that order; SUM(o.total) becomes 600. The bug isn't visible in the dashboard until an order has multiple items AND multiple payments.

Fix: Pre-aggregate the multiplying side in a C T E before joining:

Revenue now matches accounting.

Why it works: Each C T E produces one row per order, so the outer join is 1:1:1 instead of 1:N:M. Aggregation no longer multiplies. This pattern - pre-aggregate then join - is the canonical fix for "totals are too big" bugs.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Aggregates are computed at step 3 (after grouping). WHERE runs at step 2 - the count doesn't exist yet. Use HAVING (filters groups) or wrap in a subquery and filter outside.

DISTINCT is exact but has to remember every value it has seen, so its memory grows with cardinality and it spills.
HyperLogLog holds a fixed-size sketch instead, with relative accuracy 1.04/√m for m registers (Flajolet et al., 2007), sequel Server's built-in APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT (2019+) documents its own guarantee as "up to a 2% error rate within a 97% probability";
Postgres Q L needs an extension ( postgresql-hll, Apache DataSketches).
Use the exact count for invoices and audits; use a sketch for "approximate unique visitors", and because sketches merge, one stored per day answers any date range later.

On the engines that have both, they aren't really in competition: FILTER and COUNT(CASE. ) translate to similar plans, and differences come down to indexes rather than syntax.
The real distinction is availability, FILTER exists in Postgres Q L (9.4+) and SQLite, and not in sequel Server, so on a codebase that targets both, the CASE form is the only one that compiles.

Strict sequel requires all non-aggregated columns in GROUP BY. Postgres relaxes this when name is functionally dependent on customer_id (PK of customers), sequel:1999's optional feature T301, which MySQL also implements.
sequel Server rejects it with error 8120, and so does Oracle; portable code lists every selected column in GROUP BY.

Two-step, and note that the metric is per customer, not per order, so you must aggregate to the customer grain first and only then average. Averaging total directly would answer "average order value among active customers", a different number.

AVG over a per-customer SUM is not the same as AVG over rows, see Which aggregates roll up. Also put the activeness predicate in WHERE inside the C T E rather than in a HAVING over the whole table: HAVING would group every customer who ever ordered before discarding most of them.

The hash table for the groups didn't fit in work_mem times hash_mem_multiplier, so the aggregate partitioned itself and spilled to disk, that's what Batches 1 and any Disk Usage mean. First move: compare the aggregate's estimated rows with actual.
If the estimate is far low, the cause is the group-count estimate, and the fix is statistics, CREATE STATISTICS. (ndistinct) ON a, b for a multi-column GROUP BY, not more memory.
Second move: check whether an index on the grouping columns lets it use a GroupAggregate instead, which needs constant memory and cannot spill for grouping (its Sort still can). Raising work_mem is the last resort, because it's granted per node per session, not per query.

The LEFT JOIN preserves the customer as a single row with every orders column NULL. COUNT() counts rows, and that is a row. COUNT(o.id) counts non-NULL values of a column from the optional side and returns 0. The same trap applies to COUNT() in any query where the outer side can be unmatched.

Distinct counts aren't additive, a user who visits on ten days contributes ten to the sum and one to the true monthly figure, so the sum is an upper bound that grows with engagement.
Either recompute COUNT(DISTINCT user_id) over the month, or store a mergeable HyperLogLog sketch per day: the union of the sketches estimates the union of the sets, which is what a distinct count over a range actually is.

NOLOCK is READ UNCOMMITTED, and the documentation warns it "might generate errors for your transaction, present users with data that was never committed, or cause users to see records twice (or not at all)".
For a SUM that means a total wrong by an unknown amount, with no error, the worst possible failure for a financial report.
The blocking exists because the default READ COMMITTED takes shared locks when READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT is OFF; turn RCSI on (it's already the default on Azure sequel Database) or run under SNAPSHOT, and the read becomes non-blocking and consistent.
Better still, run it on a replica, and make it cheap with a covering index or a pre-aggregated table.

STRING_AGG 's return type comes from its input: a non- MAX nvarchar column yields nvarchar(4000), and exceeding it raises error 9829, "STRING_AGG aggregation result exceeded the limit of 8000 bytes.
Use LOB types to avoid result truncation." Only the group whose concatenation crosses the limit fails, which is why it looks customer-specific. Fix: STRING_AGG(CONVERT(NVARCHAR(MAX), col), ', ').
On MySQL the same shape of bug is worse to find, because group_concat_max_len truncates instead of erroring.

AVG is algebraic, not distributive, it cannot be computed from other averages, only from SUM and COUNT. Averaging daily averages weights a day with 3 orders exactly like a day with 300,000, so the monthly figure tracks the quiet days.
Store gross and order_count and compute SUM(gross) / SUM(order_count) at read time. The same rule kills stored ratios: keep numerator and denominator, divide last.
unique_customers in that table is worse still, it's holistic, so it can't be rolled up by any arithmetic; recompute it or store a mergeable sketch.

Grouping puts rows together when their keys compare equal under the column's collation. sequel Server's usual default collation is case-insensitive, and it follows the sequel-92 padding rule, so 'York', 'york' and 'York ' all collapse into one group.
Postgres Q L's default collation is deterministic: three groups. MySQL 8 would give yet another answer, utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci folds case and accents but is NO PAD, so trailing spaces split groups there. Neither engine is wrong; the query never said what "the same city" means.
Say it: GROUP BY lower(btrim(city)), with an index on that expression.

Ranking requires every group to be final, the last row read could belong to the customer who ends up first, so the scan and the aggregation are unaffected by the limit.
The only saving is a bounded sort that keeps ten rows instead of all of them ( Sort Method: top-N heapsort in Postgres Q L, the TopN Sort operator in sequel Server).
What actually reduces the work: shrinking the input with a WHERE on a date range, a covering index so the scan is narrow, or pre-aggregating the measure so the ranked list is read rather than computed.
And if this is paginated, don't use OFFSET, each page re-aggregates the table, and keyset pagination can't rescue it because the sort key is computed, not stored.

It's a trade.
There is no sequel construct for an IGrouping, so E F Core 7.0 and later build the groups on the client after the fact, the docs say "the GroupBy operator doesn't translate directly to a GROUP BY clause in the sequel, but instead,
E F Core creates the groupings after the results are returned from the server", and the sequel is a full SELECT FROM Orders ORDER BY CustomerId.
Right answers, memory and network proportional to the table, and no exception to tell you. On version 6 the failure was loud and forced a translatable rewrite (key plus scalar aggregates, which becomes a real GROUP BY, with an aggregate predicate becoming HAVING ).
Treat the 7.0 behaviour as a convenience for small sets and read the generated sequel for anything else.