-- pause --
Section 1. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, OpenAPI 3.1 versus 3.0.

Q: What changed in OpenAPI 3.1 versus 3.0?-- think --

A: Three big shifts. (1) Full alignment with Jason Schema 2020-12, previously OpenAPI used a Jason-Schema-inspired-but-not-identical subset; 3.1 just uses Jason Schema directly, so any Jason Schema validator works on OpenAPI 3.1 specs.
(2) webhooks is a first-class top-level object, describe webhooks the server emits, not just endpoints clients call. (3) null is a proper type ( type: ["string", "null"] ) rather than the awkward 3.0 nullable: true keyword.

Cross-Q: A team's tooling supports OpenAPI 3.0 but not 3.1. How do you handle the gap?-- think --

A: Stick with 3.0 until tooling catches up, most generators (NSwag, openapi-generator) added 3.1 support but with edge cases around nullable types and schema-composition keywords.
Check your downstream tooling matrix: S D K generators, lint tools (Spectral supports both but with separate rulesets), A P I gateway importers, dev portal renderers.
The migration is mostly low-risk for simple specs; complex schemas with one Of / all Of / any Of may exhibit subtle differences worth verifying with a side-by-side generation test.

Cross-Q²: A 3.0 spec uses nullable: true on a property. Converting to 3.1, what's the trap?-- think --

A: nullable: true in 3.0 + type: string means "string or null." In 3.1, nullable is gone; you write type: ["string", "null"].
Automated converters mostly handle this, but if the original spec also had enum: ["A", "B"], the conversion must produce type: ["string", "null"], enum: ["A", "B", null], many tools forget to add null to the enum, breaking the contract.
Always validate converted specs against real responses (round-trip test) and re-run linters.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Code-first versus schema-first.

Q: Code-first versus schema-first OpenAPI generation, when do you use each?-- think --

A: Code-first (Swashbuckle, Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi ), annotate code (attributes, X M L comments), framework generates spec at runtime or build time. Win when the team owns both the spec and the implementation, and developers prefer working in code.
Schema-first, author the spec by hand or via tools (Stoplight, Swagger Editor), generate server stubs and client SDKs from it.
Win when the spec is the contract negotiated cross-team before implementation, or when multiple implementations (different languages or services) must conform to the same shape.

Cross-Q: A team uses code-first. They want to enforce that the spec follows their naming conventions ("camel Case paths, kebab-case headers, all responses must have description"). How?-- think --

A: Lint the generated spec, not the code. Run Spectral with a custom ruleset on the output Jason from /openapi or v1.json: rules can enforce path naming, header conventions, mandatory descriptions, response shape coverage.
Failing the build on lint violations forces developers to add the missing annotations or fix the conventions. Code-first doesn't mean "no spec discipline"; it means "spec discipline applied to the generated artifact."

Cross-Q²: Schema-first generates server stubs. Two months later the spec evolves but the server's implementation diverges from regenerated stubs. How do teams typically handle that?-- think --

A: Several patterns. (1) Always regenerate from the spec and let the build show compile errors where implementation diverged, forces immediate alignment but breaks the build with every spec change.
(2) Generate only interfaces; implementation classes are hand-written and use the generated interface as a contract, refactor-friendly, but doesn't catch missing endpoints unless you have an architectural test.
(3) Generate the spec from the implementation (code-first), and use the schema-first spec as a target, diff the two via oasdiff, fail CI on drift. The third pattern is increasingly common: spec-first design, code-first generation, lint-and-diff for alignment.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Generated SDKs.

Q: Refit, Kiota, NSwag, when do you use each?-- think --

A: Refit, declarative C sharp client via interface attributes ( [Get("/orders/{id}")] ), no codegen step; just an interface and D I registration. Good for small consumer apps where you write the client by hand from the spec and want type safety.
Kiota, Microsoft's spec-first S D K generator (cross-language: C sharp, TS, Java, Python, Go), produces fluent request builders matching path structure. Designed for very-large A P Is (Microsoft Graph) where path navigation as a builder pattern scales.
NSwag, generates an HttpClient -based client class from OpenAPI; idiomatic C sharp with strongly-typed methods, integrates well with A S P dot NET Core via MSBuild tasks.

Cross-Q: A team uses NSwag-generated clients. They want to add retry policies. Where do they hook in?-- think --

A: NSwag generates clients that accept an HttpClient (or HttpClientFactory ), so the standard IHttpClientFactory + Polly pattern applies. Configure the client factory with AddPolicyHandler(.) for retries, circuit breakers, timeouts.
The generated client doesn't know or care about resilience; that's a property of the HttpClient it consumes. Same pattern works for Kiota ( HttpClientBuilder accepts handlers). Refit is similar, built on HttpClient, accepts handlers via RefitSettings.HttpMessageHandlerFactory.

Cross-Q²: A team picks Refit because "no codegen step." Six months in, the A P I has 200 endpoints. What's the cost?-- think --

A: 200 hand-written interface definitions, each with attributes that must mirror the spec. Drift is constant, spec changes, interface doesn't, runtime errors surface only when the endpoint is called. The "no codegen" win evaporates at scale.
Refit shines for 10-30 endpoint clients (manageable hand-maintenance); beyond that, codegen wins because the S D K regenerates from the spec on every release. Pick the tool by A P I size: Refit small, NSwag or Kiota at scale.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Swagger U I alternatives.

Q: Swagger U I alternatives, Scalar, Redoc, RapiDoc. When do you reach for each?-- think --

A: Swagger U I, the default, interactive "Try it" console, decent for small A P Is, ugly for large ones. Redoc, three-pane layout (nav, content, samples), beautiful for large A P Is, read-only (no "Try it"), great for public reference docs.
Scalar, newer alternative, polished U I, fast loading, interactive, increasingly popular as a Swagger U I replacement. RapiDoc, customizable web component, embed in your own site, supports both interactive and read-only modes.

Cross-Q: A team wants public docs that look professional but doesn't want the Swagger U I brand. Easiest swap?-- think --

A: Replace app.UseSwaggerUI() with Scalar.AspNetCore middleware ( app.MapScalarApiReference() from the Scalar.AspNetCore NuGet package), same OpenAPI source, different renderer, modern look out of the box.
For static-site flexibility, host Redoc by pointing it at the OpenAPI URL: one HTML file with a tag. Both pull from the same OpenAPI spec; the renderer is the only swap.

Cross-Q²: Why is Swagger U I's interactive console concerning in production?-- think --

A: It encourages anyone with the URL to send arbitrary requests against the production A P I, convenient for dev, gift to attackers.
Even if endpoints are auth-protected, the U I itself reveals: full endpoint catalogue (reconnaissance), parameter validation rules (boundary testing), example requests (social engineering).
Standard mitigation: disable in non-Development environments, expose only the Jason spec on a separate ops-only domain, or front the U I with the same auth as the A P I plus an internal-IP allow-list.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Examples in OpenAPI.

Q: example (singular) versus examples (plural) in OpenAPI, when do you use each?-- think --

A: example (singular) is a single inline example value for a schema, parameter, or response, quick and simple. examples (plural) is a map of named examples, each with summary, description, value, multiple scenarios for the same endpoint.
Use singular for a single canonical case; plural when you want to show happy path + validation error + edge case side-by-side.

Cross-Q: How do you wire OpenAPI examples in A S P dot NET Core code-first?-- think --

A: Two patterns. (1) Swashbuckle's [SwaggerRequestExample] / [SwaggerResponseExample] attributes + IExamplesProvider classes, declarative, ties example data to DTO type.
(2) Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi (dot NET 9+) uses transformer hooks: implement IOpenApiOperationTransformer and inject OpenApiExample entries programmatically. Pattern (1) is more discoverable per-endpoint; pattern (2) is more flexible for cross-cutting example generation.

Cross-Q²: A team's examples use real customer names and emails from staging data. Why is that a problem and what's the fix?-- think --

A: Real-looking PII in examples (a) violates G D P R or CCPA if it matches a real person, (b) makes examples indistinguishable from real records in logs and screenshots, (c) sets the wrong precedent for new examples. Use clearly synthetic data: Jane Doe, test@example.com, IDs starting with 00000000.
The example.com, example.org, example.net domains are reserved by IETF (RFC 6761) specifically for documentation. Lint rule: Spectral check that examples don't use known real domains ( spectral.io says nothing about this OOTB; write a custom rule).

-- pause --
Drill 6, Breaking-change detection (oasdiff).

Q: How do you detect breaking changes between two versions of an OpenAPI spec automatically?-- think --

A: oasdiff, a C L I that diffs two specs and classifies changes by breaking or non-breaking. oasdiff breaking base.yaml head.yaml outputs only breaking changes; --fail-on-diff returns non-zero exit code for CI integration.
It catches removed endpoints, removed required parameters, tightened type or format, renamed fields, the changes that wreck consumer code.

Cross-Q: A team's CI runs oasdiff breaking origin or main:openapi.json openapi.json --fail-on-diff on every pull request. A legitimate breaking change is needed (A P I v2 launch). How do they ship it?-- think --

A: Three patterns. (1) Override: a pull request label like breaking-change-approved that gates the lint step; reviewers explicitly opt in. (2) Spec branching: v2 spec lives in a separate file ( openapi-v2.json ); v1 spec doesn't change, so oasdiff still passes against it.
(3) Version-aware diff: oasdiff compares each version of the spec against its own prior, openapi-v1.json against main's openapi-v1.json, et cetera Pattern (3) is most operationally clean for long-lived multi-version A P Is.

Cross-Q²: Oasdiff reports a breaking change that the team believes is actually safe ("we tightened a regex pattern but no one was using the rejected values"). How do you handle?-- think --

A: Three reactions. (1) Document the exception in a pull request comment, get reviewer sign-off, override with the label or flag.
(2) Verify the claim with telemetry, search 30 days of access logs for requests matching the rejected pattern; if zero, the team is right and the change is empirically safe.
(3) Add the override to a config file ( .oasdiff-exceptions.yaml ) listing pre-approved breaking changes with justification, turns a one-off override into an audit trail. The trap: silent overrides ("we just added --ignore ") erode the value of the check. Make exceptions explicit and reviewed.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Reference data (enums, codes).

Q: How do you document reference data, enums of status codes, country codes, currency codes?-- think --

A: Three approaches. (1) Inline enum in the OpenAPI schema, type: string, enum: [USD, EUR, GBP], explicit, machine-readable, generated S D K gets a typed enum. (2) Reference to a separate components or schemas or Currency, dry when the enum is used in many places.
(3) For large or volatile enums (200 country codes), reference an external standard ( format: iso-4217 ) and document the rule in prose rather than enumerating values, keeps the spec small.

Cross-Q: A team's A P I uses status codes like PENDING, COMPLETE, CANCELLED as enum strings. They want to add IN_REVIEW. Breaking for S D K consumers?-- think --

A: Subtle. Existing consumers with strict typed deserialization (some Java or Kotlin defaults) reject unknown enum values, adding IN_REVIEW breaks them when the A P I returns the new value. C sharp System.Text.Json is more permissive; depends on the converter.
Mitigation: (a) configure S D K codegen to deserialize unknown enums as a fallback value rather than throw; (b) treat enum additions as MINOR-version changes and communicate in changelog; (c) for S D K consumers, ensure documented codegen options include lenient enum handling.

Cross-Q²: A team uses integer enums in the A P I ( status: 0 = pending, 1 = complete). What's wrong?-- think --

A: Integer enums are anti-self-documenting. A client reading the response can't tell what 2 means without consulting docs; adding a new value ( 4 = ON_HOLD) doesn't conflict with existing values but is opaque.
String enums ( "PENDING", "COMPLETE" ) are self-documenting in logs, dashboards, and curl output. Integer enums save bytes but cost clarity; only worth it for very high-throughput A P Is where every byte matters. Most A P Is should default to string enums.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Versioning the OpenAPI spec.

Q: How do you version the OpenAPI spec alongside the A P I?-- think --

A: Two patterns. (1) Path-based: separate spec per A P I major version, /openapi or v1.json, /openapi or v2.json. Each spec describes its version's endpoints; S D K generation per version is straightforward.
(2) Merged spec with multi-version tagging: one spec describes all live versions; endpoints are tagged with their version; SDKs filter by tag. Pattern (1) is more common because tooling expects one spec per version; pattern (2) works when versions overlap heavily in shape.

Cross-Q: A team checks openapi.json into git "as the source of truth." Why is that risky?-- think --

A: The spec in git can drift from the running server's actual behavior. Common drift sources: developer adds a controller, forgets to update spec; developer renames a property in code, doesn't regenerate spec; spec hand-edited for "clarity" without changing code.
Move spec generation into the build: build pipeline starts the A P I, hits /openapi or v1.json, captures the result, publishes as a build artifact. The checked-in version (if any) becomes a historical reference, not the canonical source.

Cross-Q²: A team generates spec at build time but partners consume the latest published spec from a C D N. How do you avoid partners pulling a spec that doesn't match the deployed A P I?-- think --

A: Tie spec publication to deployment events. Pattern: the build artifact ( openapi.json ) is uploaded to a C D N keyed by deployment version ( The "latest" symlink only updates after successful deployment of that version to production.
Partners reading "latest" always get the spec matching what's deployed. S D K regeneration pipelines pin to specific versions for reproducibility. The trap is "publish on pull request merge", that gets you the spec for a build that may never deploy.

-- pause --
Drill 9, A P I portal products.

Q: Stoplight, ReadMe, Mintlify, when do you reach for each over hosting Swagger U I yourself?-- think --

A: Stoplight, combines visual spec editor, mock server, and hosted dev portal. Win for teams that want to design the spec without hand-writing yamel. ReadMe, beautiful generated docs, "Try it" with auth, analytics on doc usage, versioning and changelogs. Win for public A P Is with paying partners.
Mintlify, modern docs-as-code platform with Markdown + components, good for prose-heavy docs that incorporate OpenAPI. Win when docs are more than just the A P I reference (concept guides, tutorials, runbooks).

Cross-Q: A team uses ReadMe's "Try it" feature so users can test endpoints in the docs. How do they handle auth without exposing credentials?-- think --

A: ReadMe supports O auth flows in the doc page: the docs initiate the O auth dance, the user logs in via their own credentials, the access token is held only in the user's browser session (never sent to ReadMe servers). The token populates the "Try it" widget for subsequent requests.
For A P I key auth, ReadMe encourages users to paste their own A P I key once per session. Never put a shared key in the docs, that key gets scraped within hours of publication.

Cross-Q²: A team's docs portal cost (ReadMe Enterprise) is $50K or year. Engineering wants to self-host. Trade-off?-- think --

A: Self-hosting saves money but adds engineering ownership: someone maintains the portal app, the hosting, the upgrades, the analytics, the search index, the "Try it" widget security. The crossover point is roughly "1 engineer-year > $50K", depends on local salary.
The strategic question is "do we want our engineers building a dev portal, or building features?" Most product teams pay for ReadMe or Stoplight; platform teams with strong build-versus-buy preferences sometimes self-host with tools like Slate or Docusaurus + OpenAPI plugin.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Postman versus Bruno collections.

Q: Postman Collections, Bruno collections, versus OpenAPI, what role does each play?-- think --

A: OpenAPI is the machine-readable contract, generates SDKs, drives tools, validates requests. Postman / Bruno collections are executable example workflows, pre-filled requests with environment variables, tests, chained calls (login to use token in next request).
Both can be exported from OpenAPI (Postman has built-in import; openapi-to-postman C L I). Collections shine for partner onboarding ("import this, run it, you've made 10 A P I calls successfully") where OpenAPI alone is too abstract.

Cross-Q: Why is Bruno gaining adoption over Postman?-- think --

A: Bruno's collections are stored as plain text in your git repository, not in a proprietary cloud service. Postman 11+ requires a cloud account for collection sync, making it hard to version collections alongside code.
Bruno's .bru files are diffable, reviewable, branchable, collections become normal source artifacts. For teams that treat collections as documentation, this is a major shift. Postman remains dominant for individual exploration; Bruno wins for collections-in-source-control workflows.

Cross-Q²: A team exports their Postman collection from OpenAPI nightly. Six months in, partners say the collection examples don't match real A P I behavior. Diagnosis?-- think --

A: The collection has hand-edited additions (auth tokens, helpful test scripts) that get clobbered by nightly regeneration, or the auto-export is misconfigured and missing recent endpoints.
Fixes: (1) Make the collection regeneration additive, overlay hand-edited test scripts onto the auto-generated request shells; (2) Lock the export pipeline so the collection always matches the published OpenAPI spec;
(3) Treat collections as ephemeral artifacts, regenerate per release, don't maintain across versions.
The architectural decision: collections are either "always regenerated" (cheap but no customization) or "hand-curated" (rich but drift-prone). Pick one explicitly.

-- pause --
Drill 11, Documenting errors.

Q: How do you document error responses in OpenAPI?-- think --

A: For each endpoint, enumerate the status codes returned and describe the response body for each. Standard codes: 400 (validation), 401 (unauthenticated), 403 (unauthorized), 404 (resource not found), 409 (conflict), 422 (validation with business semantics), 429 (rate limit), 500 (server error).
Each should have a description, a content schema (often ProblemDetails per RFC 9457, which obsoleted RFC 7807 in 2023), and ideally an example. The error schema itself can be a shared components or responses or ProblemDetails referenced from every endpoint to avoid duplication.

Cross-Q: A team documents only 200 responses ("clients shouldn't need to handle errors specifically"). What goes wrong?-- think --

A: Generated SDKs assume any non-200 throws a generic exception, so consumers lose type-safe error handling. Documentation users don't know what to expect for failures and either over-handle (catch every status code defensively) or under-handle (assume 200 is the only response).
Specifically, missing 400 docs means consumers don't know the validation-error shape; missing 429 docs means they don't know to back off. Document all status codes the endpoint intends to return.

Cross-Q²: ProblemDetails (RFC 9457, which obsoleted RFC 7807) versus custom error shapes, when do you deviate?-- think --

A: ProblemDetails ( {type, title, status, detail, instance} plus extensions) is the standard; most tooling expects it.
Deviate when (a) your A P I serves clients in an ecosystem with its own error convention (Google Cloud's {code, message, errors[]}, Jason:A P I's {errors: [{status, source, detail}]} ); (b) you need richer error structure that ProblemDetails extensions can't express cleanly.
The default should be ProblemDetails; custom shapes carry the burden of explaining themselves. A S P dot NET Core emits ProblemDetails natively via Results.Problem(.), so it's the path of least resistance.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Security schemes.

Q: How do you document authentication in OpenAPI?-- think --

A: components.security Schemes defines the auth schemes (Bearer J W T, OAuth2, A P I key, OpenID Connect); each endpoint or the global security field references them. Example: security Schemes: { Bearer: { type: http, scheme: bearer, bearer Format: J W T } }.
Endpoint requirement: security: [{ Bearer: [] }].
For OAuth2: define flows ( authorization Code, client Credentials ), scopes, token URLs.

Cross-Q: A team adds the security scheme but Swagger U I doesn't show an "Authorize" button. What's missing?-- think --

A: Two common causes. (1) The scheme is defined but no security requirement is attached to any endpoint or globally, Swagger U I needs at least one endpoint reference to render the button.
(2) Swashbuckle's AddSwaggerGen needs both AddSecurityDefinition and AddSecurityRequirement calls; just defining without requiring leaves the button absent. Fix: ensure both calls are present and the requirement matches the scheme name.
For Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi (dot NET 9+), implement IOpenApiOperationTransformer to attach security per operation, or IOpenApiDocumentTransformer to set it globally.

Cross-Q²: OAuth2 flows in OpenAPI are notoriously fiddly. What's the common failure mode?-- think --

A: Mismatched URL paths. The OpenAPI spec declares authorization Url: token Url: The real O auth server is at and /oauth2 or token. Swagger U I's "Authorize" launches a popup to the wrong URL, user sees a generic error, no useful diagnostic.
Fix: verify the URLs in the spec match the O auth server's actual endpoints; check the OIDC discovery document ( /.well-known or openid-configuration ) for canonical values. Better: reference the OpenID Connect discovery URL via openIdConnectUrl so Swagger U I auto-discovers the endpoints.

-- pause --
Drill 13, Server URLs.

Q: How do you document multiple environments (dev, staging, prod) in OpenAPI?-- think --

A: servers array at the top of the spec, each entry with url, description, and optional variables.

yaml.
servers:
url:
description: Production.
url:
description: Staging.
url:
description: Customer-specific.
variables:
customer Subdomain:
default: demo.
enum: [demo, customer1, customer2].

Swagger U I lets users pick from the list; "Try it" hits the selected base URL.

Cross-Q: A team publishes a single OpenAPI spec that includes both staging and production server URLs. What's the risk?-- think --

A: A user reading the docs might accidentally test against production from the "Try it" widget. For destructive endpoints (DELETE, POST that creates real charges), this can damage real data.
Mitigations: (a) publish a separate spec per environment, hosted under the corresponding domain; (b) include only the non-destructive server in the public spec, with prose pointing users to internal docs for production access;
(c) configure the dev portal to default to a sandbox environment regardless of spec ordering.

Cross-Q²: Server URLs with variables ( {customer Subdomain} ), when is this useful and when does it cause problems?-- think --

A: Useful for white-labeled A P Is where each customer has their own subdomain, one spec, parameterized base URL.
Problematic when (a) consumers misinterpret variables as path templates (they're not, they're substitution in the base URL); (b) some endpoints differ per customer (one customer has feature X, another doesn't) and a single spec implies homogeneity;
(c) URL variables don't work cleanly with C D N caching.
For multi-tenant SaaS, per-customer specs hosted at each subdomain are clearer than one parameterized spec.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Tags versus operation Id.

Q: What do generators use from tags and operation Id ?-- think --

A: tags group operations in the rendered docs (Swagger U I sections, Redoc nav groups) and often map to S D K class names ( OrdersApi, UsersApi ).
operation Id is the unique identifier for the operation, generators use it as the method name in S D K classes ( OrdersApi.get Order, OrdersApi.create Order ).
Both should be deliberate and stable; changes break S D K consumers.

Cross-Q: A team auto-generates operation Id from controller or method names ( GetOrder_OrdersController ). What's the issue?-- think --

A: Two issues. (1) Auto-generated IDs are verbose and ugly in generated SDKs ( OrdersClient.GetOrder_OrdersController() instead of OrdersClient.GetOrder() ). (2) They change whenever code changes, renaming a controller method silently breaks generated S D K method names, breaking consumer code.
Fix: explicit [EndpointName("GetOrder")] or Swashbuckle's OperationIdFilter to set predictable IDs. Document the IDs as part of the A P I contract; treat changes as breaking.

Cross-Q²: One operation has three tags ( orders, admin, internal ). What's the consequence for S D K generation?-- think --

A: Most generators put the operation in the first tag's class, so OrdersApi.get Order. Some generators (openapi-generator) duplicate the operation across all tagged classes; you'd get OrdersApi.get Order, AdminApi.get Order, InternalApi.get Order.
Either way, the S D K shape is awkward and consumers don't know which to call.
Convention: one primary tag per operation for S D K grouping; additional tags reserved for filtering in dev portal U I ( x-internal: true extension is preferred for "internal-only" marking that some generators understand).

-- pause --
Drill 15, Hand-written versus autogenerated docs.

Q: When does autogenerated documentation fall short, and where do hand-written docs win?-- think --

A: Autogeneration captures the reference layer, endpoints, parameters, schemas, status codes.
It misses conceptual content: "what's the auth flow?", "how do I handle pagination cursors?", "what's the rate-limiting strategy?", "what are the integration patterns?", "what's a real end-to-end workflow?". Hand-written prose, tutorials, and conceptual guides answer those.
Best docs combine both: autogenerated reference for accuracy, hand-written guides for usability.

Cross-Q: A team's hand-written docs drift from the A P I behavior within months. How do you keep them current?-- think --

A: Three structural fixes. (1) Test the prose against the A P I, embed real curl examples in docs and run them in CI; failures fail the docs build. (2) Date the prose ("last reviewed: 2026-05-01") and require quarterly review for any page over 90 days old.
(3) Reduce hand-written content to the minimum that adds value, concept docs and tutorials, not endpoint-by-endpoint description that duplicates the spec. The more hand-written content, the more drift; keep prose narrow.

Cross-Q²: A team uses Mintlify with .mdx files in git containing both prose and embedded OpenAPI references. What's the workflow win?-- think --

A: Docs live alongside code in the same repo; pull requests that change code can also update docs; review process catches doc drift at pull request time. The .mdx files reference the OpenAPI spec for endpoint reference ( or similar), so the prose surrounds machine-generated reference content.
Concept guides, error-handling tutorials, integration patterns live as Markdown alongside the A P I code. The workflow: code change + spec regeneration + docs update in one pull request, single review.
Versus the separate-docs-repo pattern where the A P I team ships and the docs team catches up weeks later.

-- pause --
Section 2. Self-test.

Swagger U I exposes the full endpoint catalogue, request or response shapes, parameter ranges, and example payloads, a reconnaissance dream. Attackers map your attack surface in seconds. The auth wall on individual endpoints doesn't help if the U I itself is anonymous.
Either disable in non-Development environments ( if (app.Environment.IsDevelopment()) ), put it behind the same auth as the A P I plus an additional internal-IP allow-list, or expose only the Jason spec on a separate ops domain.

OpenAPI's mental model is request to response: there's a path, an H T T P method, an input, a response. Async messaging has no response on the wire, a publisher emits a message; subscribers consume independently.
AsyncAPI models channels (topics or queues), messages (payload schemas), operations ( send / receive ), bindings (Kafka, AMQP, M Q T T, WebSocket transport details), and security per channel. It's the contract between a producer and N consumers across a broker, not a synchronous call.

NSwag is C sharp-first: tighter integration with A S P dot NET Core, runs as a build task, generates idiomatic C sharp and TS clients with HttpClient factory hooks, supports MSBuild-time generation.
OpenAPI Generator is language-agnostic with templates for ~40 languages, more mature for non-dot NET targets (Java, Python, Go), but the generated code can feel less idiomatic per-language.
Pick NSwag for dot NET-only stacks; OpenAPI Generator when you serve diverse client languages and need uniform tooling across them.

Examples ship to the public docs site. Real-looking PII in examples (a) violates G D P R or CCPA if it matches a real person, (b) makes the test data indistinguishable from real records in logs and screenshots, (c) sets a bad pattern for new examples.
Use clearly synthetic data: Jane Doe, test@example.com, IDs starting with 00000000. The example.com domain is reserved by IETF specifically for documentation. If your examples need to look realistic for client testing, generate them with a name-faker keyed off RFC 6761 reserved domains.

Per-service primary docs, with a federated developer portal that aggregates them.
Reasons: (a) single 200-endpoint doc is unbrowsable, (b) each service team owns its own spec lifecycle and versioning, (c) per-service generation cycle is faster, (d) clients can pull the S D K they need without bloating their dependency.
The federation layer (Stoplight, Backstage, custom portal) handles cross-service search and onboarding. The pattern matches Conway's law, your docs match your team boundaries.