-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

This is the "skip if you've shipped C sharp for two years" file, but read it anyway, because it nails down the exact semantics that the rest of the sub-chapter assumes.
Things like definite-assignment rules, integer overflow behavior, what params actually generates, and why Console.WriteLine($"{x}") doesn't allocate the way you'd think, these are foundational,
and senior interviewers ask about them precisely because they reveal whether the candidate knows the language or just the framework.

Everything beyond this session (type system, generics, link, memory) builds on the vocabulary cemented here. Faster to spend 15 minutes pinning it down than to discover later that you've been hand-waving over default(T) semantics.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Statements versus expressions.

C sharp is a statement-based language with expression-bodied sugar layered on top. The distinction matters when reading modern C sharp, most of the terseness comes from expressions, not statements.

A statement does something (assignment, branching, looping). Ends with;.
An expression computes a value. No; of its own; embedded inside statements.

switch and throw exist in both forms (statement and expression), modern code prefers the expression forms for terseness:

-- pause --
Primitive types and literals.

C sharp has 15 built-in types that map directly to C L R types in System. The shorthand keyword and the full type are interchangeable; int and System.Int32 are literally the same type.

bool, System.Boolean, 1 byte, true / false.
byte, System.Byte, 1 byte, 0, 255 (unsigned).
sbyte, System.SByte, 1 byte, -128, 127.
short, System.Int16, 2 bytes, ~ plus or minus 32k.
ushort, System.UInt16, 2 bytes, 0, 65k.
int, System.Int32, 4 bytes, ~ plus or minus 2.1B (default integer literal).
uint, System.UInt32, 4 bytes, 0, 4.3B.
long, System.Int64, 8 bytes, ~ plus or minus 9.2 times 10¹⁸.
ulong, System.UInt64, 8 bytes, 0, 1.8 times 10¹⁹.
float, System.Single, 4 bytes, IEEE-754 single-precision.
double, System.Double, 8 bytes, IEEE-754 double-precision (default real literal).
decimal, System.Decimal, 16 bytes, Base-10 fixed-point, for money.
char, System.Char, 2 bytes, UTF-16 code unit.
string, System.String, reference, immutable UTF-16 sequence.
object, System.Object, reference, root of all types.

Three more keywords belong on that list even though they aren't fixed-size:
nint and nuint, pointer-sized integers, introduced in C sharp 9 and, since C sharp 11, plain aliases for System.IntPtr / System.UIntPtr, and dynamic, which is System.Object plus a compiler instruction to defer binding to the DLR.

Numeric literal suffixes: untyped numeric literals default to int (integers) and double (real). Use suffixes when you need a different type:

Decimal versus double for money: decimal is base-10, double is base-2. 0.1 + 0.2 == 0.3 is false in double but true in decimal. Always decimal for currency, never double. The next section walks through why.

In the real world: a device-telemetry ingest service stored a sensor reading as int milli Volts because that was the wire format, then computed long micro Volts = milli Volts * 1000 for the analytics table. It worked for two years on 3.3 V hardware.
A new industrial sensor reported readings 2,147,483 millivolts, int.MaxValue / 1000, and the column started showing negative microvolts, int multiplication wrapping, silently, exactly as the language specifies.
The literal 1000 was the tell: an untyped integer literal is int, so the whole expression is evaluated in 32-bit space and only then widened to whatever the target is. The fix was one character, 1000L, plus a lint rule banning bare integer multiplication on any column named *_raw.

var is not dynamic. var is implicit static typing, the compiler infers the type at compile time. Once inferred, it's locked in. var x = 5; is identical to int x = 5;. If you want runtime typing (which you almost never do), that's dynamic.

-- pause --
decimal versus double versus float, picking the right real number.

The three real-number types in C sharp look interchangeable in toy code. They are not. Choosing wrong silently corrupts financial reports, breaks tax math by a cent per million transactions, and burns afternoons on "why is the total off by 0.00000000000004?"

The fundamental split: base-2 versus base-10.

float and double are binary floating point, they store numbers as mantissa times 2exponent. Most "nice" decimal fractions ( 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 ) cannot be represented exactly in binary, the same way 1 or 3 cannot be represented exactly in base-10 ( 0.333. ).

decimal is not IEEE-754 decimal128, a confusion worth killing before an interviewer does it for you. Microsoft Learn describes the layout precisely: 128 bits made of a 96-bit integer, a sign, and a scaling factor, a power of ten from 0 to 28. So the value is plus or minus (96-bit integer) / 10scale.
Every base-10 fraction a human writes down inside 28, 29 significant digits is representable exactly; anything needing a 29th digit, or a non-terminating base-10 expansion, is not:

decimal buys you exact representation of the numbers people write down, not exact arithmetic. Division still rounds. That distinction is what separates a candidate who has read the type from one who has repeated the slogan.

The scale is part of the value. decimal preserves trailing zeros, because the scale is stored rather than normalised away:

Equality and hashing agree; string formatting does not. Anything that round-trips a decimal through text, a cache key, an idempotency fingerprint, a signed request body, a Jason diff, can therefore see two "equal" amounts as different.
Normalise deliberately at the boundary rather than hoping every producer used the same scale, and note that rounding is not the tool for this: decimal.Round only ever reduces scale, so decimal.Round(1.0m, 2) is still 1.0 and formats as "1.0" while 1.00m formats as "1.00".
What fixes it is an explicit format string, x.ToString("F2", CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), which pins the digit count regardless of the incoming scale.

The canonical demo every interviewer expects:

The double result is not a bug, it's the closest binary representation of 0.3 differing from 0.1 + 0.2 (also each "the closest binary"). Two things follow, and only the second one is the reason to care. First, the per-operation error is tiny and bounded; nobody loses a fortune to one rounding.
Second, and fatally, the error is not reproducible across different orders of operation, summing a batch of double line items in a different order can produce a different total, so the invoice,
the ledger and the reconciliation job disagree by a fraction of a cent and no two of them can be made to agree by rounding.
Auditors do not care how small the discrepancy is; they care that it exists.

Comparison matrix:

Size, 4 bytes, 8 bytes, 16 bytes.
Precision, ~7 decimal digits, ~15-17 decimal digits, 28-29 decimal digits.
Range, plus or minus 3.4 times 10³⁸, plus or minus 1.7 times 10³⁰⁸, plus or minus 7.9 times 10²⁸.
Exact 0.1.
Hardware-accelerated, FPU or SIMD instructions, FPU or SIMD instructions, software routines over the integer unit.
Overflow behaviour, Infinity, never throws, Infinity, never throws, OverflowException.
Default literal suffix, f (required), (none), m (required).
Use for, Graphics, ML, sensors, Scientific, statistics, Money, percentages, anything counted in base-10.

On speed, prefer the mechanism to a multiplier: double addition is a single C P U instruction and vectorises across a SIMD register; decimal addition is a call into a software routine that has to align two scales before it can add two 96-bit integers, and it is twice the width in memory and cache.
That is a real and large gap in a numerical inner loop, and invisible next to a single database round-trip in a business app. Measure your own case with BenchmarkDotNet before quoting a number to anyone.

In the real world: an insurance quoting engine held premiums in double because the actuarial library it wrapped was double -based, and rounded to two places only at the very end. Quotes matched the finance system to the cent for years.
Then a "split the premium across instalments" feature landed, and support started getting tickets where twelve instalments summed to one cent more or less than the annual premium, but only for some policies.
The engine was rounding each instalment independently from a double that was already a hair off.
The fix was structural rather than clever: keep decimal end to end for anything that will be charged, keep double for the actuarial model that predicts, and convert once at the boundary with an explicit, documented rounding rule.
The reusable lesson: the bug is almost never a wrong-looking number on screen, it is two systems that each rounded correctly and now disagree.

Decision rules:

Money, ever? to decimal. Non-negotiable. If a financial auditor would ask "did the math reconcile to the cent?", use decimal.
Physics / graphics / ML / signal processing? to double. Speed dominates, the underlying domain is continuous, rounding errors are part of the model.
Memory-constrained sensor / shader data? to float. Only if you've measured that the smaller size wins (cache hits, vectorization width).
Default for "a number with decimals"? to double, it's the unsuffixed literal type. But the moment that number represents currency, tax, interest, commission, or anything an accountant tracks, switch to decimal.

Common pitfalls:

Storing money as double "because it's faster", the speed advantage doesn't help when QA reports drift on the year-end statement. decimal for money is the engineering equivalent of brushing your teeth: non-optional.
Watch for it leaking in sideways too: a double column in the reporting database, a Jason number deserialised into double because the DTO used object, an Excel export.
Mixing decimal and double arithmetic, there's no implicit conversion (compile error). Forces you to pick a side; that's a feature, not a bug.
double.NaN == double.NaN is false. IEEE-754 says NaN is unordered. Use double.IsNaN(x).
Forgetting the m suffix: decimal d = 0.1; won't compile, 0.1 is double, no implicit conversion. Write 0.1m.
float -as-currency in legacy systems, when migrating, the cleanest path is decimal-typed A P Is at the boundary, with documented rounding rules at the conversion point.

-- pause --
Variables, scope, and definite assignment.

C sharp enforces definite assignment: a local variable must be assigned before it's read. This is a compile-time check, not runtime.

Fields (class members) get default values automatically: 0 / false / null / default(T). Only locals require explicit assignment.

Scope in C sharp:
Block scope, {. }. A variable declared inside a block is invisible outside it.
Method scope, parameters and locals.
Class scope, fields and members.

The precise rule is worth knowing because "C sharp has no hoisting" is a half-truth that falls apart under one cross-question. The scope of a local is the entire enclosing block, including the lines its declaration, exactly like JavaScript's let, and unlike var.
What C sharp forbids is using the name before the declaration point. So the name is reserved the whole way down, and touching it early is an error rather than a silent read of something else:

Without a same-named field in play the error is CS0841 instead, but the principle is identical: the block owns the name from its first line. And two locals with the same name in nested scopes is a separate error, CS0136, unlike C plus plus where the inner one silently shadows:

Scope and definite assignment are two different rules, and mixing them up is a reliable interview stumble. Pattern variables and out var declarations escape into the enclosing scope, but whether they are readable there depends on flow analysis:

Note the error code: CS0165 (unassigned), not CS0103 (does not exist). The variable is visible; the compiler just cannot prove a value reached it. This is why the is not. return guard shape reads so cleanly and the if (x is T y) { } shape does not.

In the real world: a code review flagged if (!dict.TryGetValue(key, out var cached)) { cached = Load(key); } as "confusing scope" and the author rewrote it as dict.TryGetValue(key, out var cached); if (cached is null) cached = Load(key);
, which compiles, because out guarantees assignment regardless of the return value, and which quietly changed the semantics for a cache that legitimately stored nulls.
The first form asks "was there an entry?"; the second asks "is the value null?". They differ exactly when a null was cached deliberately, which was the negative-caching case the service had added the month before.
The reviewable rule that came out of it: never discard the bool from a Try* method, it is answering a different question from the out value.

-- pause --
Scope, captures, and closures, when a local outlives its block.

Everything assumed a local dies when its block ends. A lambda, a local function, or an async method body can break that assumption: if the code inside refers to a local from the enclosing scope, the compiler captures it, and the variable's lifetime stretches to match the delegate's.

The mechanism. The compiler rewrites the method. Captured locals stop being stack slots and become fields of a generated class, a display class, allocated on the heap. Every reference to the variable, inside the lambda and in the original method body, is rewritten to touch that field.
There is exactly one field, so both sides see the same storage. Understanding that single fact predicts every closure behaviour.

The loop-variable trap, and why for and foreach differ. A for loop declares its variable once, so every lambda created inside the loop captures the same field and all of them observe the final value.
A foreach iteration variable is a fresh variable per iteration (changed in C sharp 5 precisely because the old behaviour was a permanent bug factory), so each lambda gets its own display class:

The fix for the for case is one line, copy into a per-iteration local, which forces a per-iteration display class:

Proving you did not capture. Two modifiers turn accidental capture into a compile error rather than a production incident:

static lambdas (C sharp 9): static () goes to DoWork(), cannot reference any enclosing local, parameter or this.
static local functions (C sharp 8): same guarantee, and a non-capturing local function needs no display class at all.

Capturing this by accident. Referring to any instance field or method inside a lambda captures this, which keeps the whole object alive for as long as the delegate does.
That is the standard mechanism behind "my scoped service is still in memory an hour later": an event handler or a cached Func<> rooted an object graph nobody meant to keep.

In the real world: a background worker fanned out per-tenant refresh jobs with for (int i = 0; i Refresh(tenants[i])));. In development, with three tenants and a fast loop, it usually refreshed tenant 0, 1 and 2, because the tasks happened to start before the loop advanced.
In production it refreshed the last tenant three times and threw ArgumentOutOfRangeException on the run where the loop finished first, since i had reached Count. Two symptoms, one cause, and neither reproduced under a debugger.
The rewrite was foreach (var tenant in tenants) tasks.Add(Task.Run(() goes to Refresh(tenant)));, correct because the foreach variable is per-iteration, plus a review rule that any lambda handed to Task.Run inside a loop must capture a loop-local, never an index.

In the real world: an A S P dot NET Core service registered a cache-invalidation callback in a singleton from inside a scoped handler: _bus.Subscribe(() goes to _dbContext.Reload()). The lambda captured this, this held the scoped DbContext, and the singleton held the lambda forever.
Memory climbed one DbContext per request and the eventual crash was ObjectDisposedException from a captured context, not OutOfMemoryException, which sent the investigation down the wrong path for a day.
The mechanical fix was to capture nothing scoped: the callback closes over the singleton IServiceScopeFactory instead, and resolves a fresh DbContext from a new scope each time it fires.
The general rule: a delegate stored somewhere longer-lived than the object that created it must not capture that object.

Allocation counting for closures, how many display classes, and when they can be avoided entirely, is covered in Memory and Performance.

-- pause --
const versus static readonly, the value baked into the caller.

Both look like "a named constant". They differ in when the value is read, and that difference crosses assembly boundaries, which makes it a versioning question rather than a style question.

Evaluated, Compile time, Run time (static constructor / field initialiser).
Stored as, A literal in the consuming I L, A field listen on each access.
Allowed types, Numbers, bool, char, string, enums, null, Any type.
Value can depend on, Other constants only, Anything, config, DateTime.Now, D I.
Usable in case labels, attributes, default parameter values, pattern constants.
Changing the value in a library, Requires recompiling every consumer, Consumers pick it up on the next assembly load.

The versioning consequence is the whole point, and Microsoft Learn states it plainly in the const reference:
"because compilers propagate constants, other code compiled with your libraries needs to be recompiled to see the changes." The consuming assembly does not call back into yours to ask for the value, it copied the literal at its compile time.

Ship Acme.Shared v1.1 with MaxPageSize = 500 and drop the DLL next to an un-recompiled Acme.Api: the A P I still enforces 100, while the library's own code enforces 500. Two limits, one name, no error message.

const decimal is a special case worth knowing: decimal is not an I L literal type, so the compiler stores the value in a DecimalConstantAttribute on the field and reconstructs it.
It still behaves as a compile-time constant for C sharp's purposes, which is why const decimal is legal but const DateTime is not.

Senior rule of thumb: const for values that are true by definition and can never change, Math.PI -shaped things, protocol magic numbers, "application or json". static readonly for every tunable, limit, timeout, or version string in a package other teams consume.

In the real world: a shared Common.Constants.ApiVersion = "v2" was declared const and referenced by six services to build outbound URLs. The platform team shipped v3, bumped the constant, republished the NuGet package, and redeployed the two services that had a code change that sprint.
The other four had only their package reference updated by the automated dependency bot, which updates the reference but does not, on its own, produce a rebuilt binary in every pipeline, and one of them was deployed from a cached build artefact.
It kept calling /v2 for three weeks until the endpoint was retired. Nothing about the incident was visible in a diff: the source said v3 everywhere.
The postmortem action was mechanical rather than procedural, public const string was banned from the shared package in favour of static readonly, so that the value lives in exactly one binary.

-- pause --
Operators.

C sharp operators behave mostly like other curly-brace languages, but a few have surprises.

Integer division truncates toward zero: 7 / 2 == 3, -7 / 2 == -3. To get a real number, cast: 7.0 / 2 == 3.5.

Integer overflow is silent by default. int.MaxValue + 1 == int.MinValue. Use checked to throw on overflow, covered in depth in its own section.

Null-related operators (modern C sharp):
?., null-conditional access. x?.Y is null if x is null, else x.Y.
??, null-coalescing. a ?? b returns a if non-null, else b.
??=, null-coalescing assignment. a ??= b assigns b to a if a is null.
!, null-forgiving (post-fix). Tells the compiler "I know this is non-null." No runtime effect; suppresses NRT warnings.

Bit operators: and | ~ > (and >>> for unsigned shift, C sharp 11). Often used for flag enums; rarely otherwise.

Two arithmetic edge cases interviewers like. Integer division by zero always throws DivideByZeroException, and one non-zero division throws as well, with a different exception, even in an unchecked context:

There is no positive counterpart to int.MinValue in two's complement, so the result cannot exist and the runtime throws rather than wrapping. unchecked does not suppress it. The second case: unary minus on a uint promotes to long, because the negation has to be representable somewhere:

-- pause --
checked / unchecked and integer overflow.

C sharp integer arithmetic is silently wrapping by default. int.MaxValue + 1 == int.MinValue, not an exception. This was a perf decision in 2000: arithmetic without overflow detection is one I L instruction; arithmetic with detection is several.
For an InfoSec or financial app, that perf choice is the wrong default, and the language gives you two knobs to flip it.

Three scopes:

The I L difference (why it matters):

a + b (default), add, Silent wrap.
checked(a + b), add.ovf, Throws OverflowException.
(uint)a + b (default), add, Silent wrap.
checked((uint)a + b), add ovf un, Throws ( .un = unsigned overflow check).

add.ovf costs an extra check of the C P U's overflow flag and a conditional branch to the throw helper, and it blocks some jit optimisations (the operation can now throw, so it can't be freely reordered or vectorised).
Whether that is measurable depends entirely on the loop; for ordinary business code it is noise, for a numeric kernel it is not. Measure the specific loop rather than carrying a multiplier around in your head.

What overflows silently in production code:

What checked / unchecked do NOT catch:
Floating-point overflow to produces Infinity / -Infinity, never throws.
decimal overflow to already throws OverflowException by default (no checked needed).
Lossy narrowing conversions ( long to int ) to these are only checked under checked context. Under default unchecked, (int)long.MaxValue == -1 silently.

Per-project recommendation for senior teams:

Default-on overflow checking in Debug and Release for any project handling money, IDs, sizes, time durations, or cryptographic counters. Annotate the rare hot loops where wrap is intentional (hash mixing, CRCs) with unchecked { }.
The cost is a small, measurable perf hit in arithmetic-heavy code; the benefit is loud failures instead of silent corruption.

In the real world: a warehouse system computed available stock as on Hand - reserved, both int, both non-negative by every invariant the team believed in.
A bug in a concurrent reservation path let reserved exceed on Hand, the subtraction went negative, and the negative value was then cast to a uint for a message contract, where it became roughly four billion units of available stock.
Downstream, the replenishment service dutifully cancelled every purchase order. Turning on would not have caught the subtraction (it does not overflow, int holds negatives fine); it would have caught the uint cast, which is a checked-context conversion.
That is the useful distinction to carry into an interview: the project flag turns silent narrowing conversions into exceptions, and narrowing conversions are where most of the real damage happens.

-- pause --
Conversions, implicit, explicit, and the ones that lose data.

Every conversion in C sharp answers two questions: does the compiler allow it silently, and what happens when the value doesn't fit. Most engineers know the first and assume the second follows from it. It doesn't, and that gap is where the bugs live.

The rule that surprises people: implicit does not mean lossless. C sharp allows an implicit conversion when there is no loss of magnitude, the number stays in the right ballpark.
Precision is a separate promise, and Microsoft Learn is explicit that it is not made: the implicit conversions from int, uint, long, ulong, nint or nuint to float, and from long, ulong, nint or nuint to double, "can cause a loss of precision, but never a loss of an order of magnitude."

float has 24 bits of significand, so it runs out of consecutive integers at 2²⁴. The compiler is content because 16,777,216 is the right order of magnitude.
An int identity column widened to float for a chart axis, or a long timestamp implicitly converted to double for a Jason number, loses digits exactly this way, silently, with no cast to grep for.

Numeric promotion: the small integer types barely have operators. sbyte, byte, short, ushort and char define only ++ and --. For every other arithmetic operator the operands are converted to int and the result is int:

But compound assignment inserts a cast for you. x op= y is defined as x = (T)(x op y) when the promoted result is explicitly convertible back to x 's type. So the assignment that looks identical compiles, and truncates:

That is a documented language rule, not a compiler quirk, and it is the reason += on narrow accumulators is a code-review smell. In a checked context the same line throws instead.

What explicit conversions do when the value doesn't fit, four different behaviours, and knowing which is which is the senior part:

integer to smaller integer, unchecked, maps to, Discards the high-order bits; result is fully specified. (int)long.MaxValue == -1.
integer to smaller integer, checked, maps to, OverflowException.
double / float to integer, unchecked, maps to, Truncates toward zero; if the result is out of range the value is unspecified by the language, do not rely on it.
In practice dot NET 9+ saturates to the target's MinValue / MaxValue on every architecture; dot NET 8 and earlier on x86 or x64 produced int.MinValue instead.
double / float to integer, checked, maps to, OverflowException.
decimal to integer, maps to, Rounds toward zero, and throws OverflowException when out of range regardless of context.
float / double to decimal, maps to, OverflowException for NaN, infinity, or too-large; zero for too-small.

Cast versus as versus pattern. Three ways to change a reference's static type, with three failure modes:

as on a non-nullable value type is a compile error, which is why o as int doesn't work and o as int? does. Prefer the pattern form: it never produces a null you have to remember to check.

Truncate or round? (int), Convert, and Math.Round disagree on purpose. This is the single most common conversion bug in business code:

Convert.ToInt32 and Math.Round default to round-half-to-even (banker's rounding), documented on Microsoft Learn as "if value is halfway between two whole numbers, the even number is returned;
that is, 4.5 is converted to 4, and 5.5 is converted to 6." That is statistically unbiased and is what most accounting standards want; it is also not what the person reading your unit test expects.
Whenever money is involved, pass MidpointRounding explicitly so the intent is in the source rather than in the framework's default.

User-defined conversions. A type can declare its own:

The design rule: implicit only when the conversion cannot fail and cannot lose information; anything lossy or throwing must be explicit, so the call site shows a cast.
C sharp 11 added user-defined checked operators, letting your explicit conversion honour the caller's overflow context the way the built-in ones do, you must define the unchecked version too, and a checked context selects the checked one.

Generic-math conversions (dot NET 7+). INumberBase gives you three conversion policies as named methods, which is far clearer than a cast whose behaviour depends on an ambient context:

CreateSaturating is the one most A P Is actually want at a boundary: clamp a hostile or absurd input rather than wrap it into a plausible-looking small number.

In the real world: a reporting endpoint accepted ?page Size= as a double (because the front end sent Jason numbers) and did int size = (int)page Size;. A client sent 1e10.
The cast was in an unchecked context and out of range, which the language leaves unspecified, and on the x64 servers of the day that meant int.MinValue, roughly negative two billion.
The page-size guard was if (size > 100) size = 100;, and a large negative number sails straight through a > 100 test, so the query ran with a negative TOP.
It also refused to reproduce on the team's Apple Silicon laptops, where the same cast saturated to int.MaxValue and was duly clamped to 100, the identical source line, two architectures, two behaviours, because the language never promised one.
(dot NET 9 made these conversions saturating everywhere, so today both sides give int.MaxValue and the guard catches it.
The lesson survives the fix: the code was reading a value the specification declines to define.) The fix was to stop converting and start validating:
bind the parameter as int?, reject anything outside 1.100 with a 400, and, for the places that genuinely had to accept a double, use int.CreateSaturating, which is defined for every input instead of merely usually behaving.

In the real world: a payment reconciliation job compared an amount from the gateway ( decimal ) with an amount from the ledger (a C sharp float, because the O R M had mapped a single-precision sequel real column).
C sharp refuses to compare those implicitly, so an earlier developer had "fixed" the compile error with (decimal)ledger Amount.
The cast was not the culprit, it faithfully converts whatever precision is left, but float carries only about seven significant digits, so any amount past six figures had already lost its cents before the comparison ever ran.
A small number of large transactions differed by 0.01, were flagged as fraud-suspect, and were held. The absence of an implicit double to and from decimal conversion is a feature: it is the language forcing a design decision at every boundary, and casting the error away throws that protection out.
The correct fix was upstream, in the column type.

-- pause --
Parsing and formatting, the culture that changes under you.

Parsing is a conversion whose input is text, and text conversions in dot NET are culture-sensitive by default.
CultureInfo.CurrentCulture is read from the ambient thread when you don't pass a provider, and it differs between your laptop, the build agent, and the container running with a different LANG.

Read that first line again: no exception, no warning, a value off by a factor of ten. The default NumberStyles for double.Parse includes AllowThousands, so "1.5" is read as "one thousand five" with a stray separator.
A German-locale server parsing an American-format CSV does not fail loudly; it produces confident, wrong numbers.

The rule that prevents all of it: machines talk to machines in InvariantCulture; humans see CurrentCulture.

Reading a config file, CSV, H T T P payload, database string, another service's Jason, maps to, CultureInfo.InvariantCulture (or the culture the format actually specifies).
Rendering a price, date or number for a user, maps to, CultureInfo.CurrentCulture, or the user's stored preference.
Comparing identifiers, keys, protocol tokens, file extensions, maps to, Not a culture question at all, use StringComparison.Ordinal.

Formatting has the mirror image of the problem: amount.ToString() on a de-DE thread emits 1234,5, which a downstream invariant parser will reject or misread. Round-tripping ( "O" for dates, "R" /default for floating point) plus InvariantCulture is the machine-to-machine default.

The ICU switch (dot NET 5). From dot NET 5, dot NET uses ICU rather than the operating system's NLS for globalization on Windows 10 May 2019 Update and later, which changed results for culture-sensitive operations.
Microsoft's own documented example is "Hello\r\nworld!".IndexOf("\n"): 6 on dot NET Core 3.1, -1 on dot NET 5 (ICU treated the newline as an ignorable character in a linguistic search), and 6 again on dot NET 6+.
Three answers for one line of code across three runtimes, and the code was only ever wrong in the sense that it asked a linguistic question about a control character. IndexOf("\n", StringComparison.Ordinal) returns 6 on all of them.

Two more knobs worth naming in an interview:
true makes every culture behave like the invariant culture (smaller container images, and a hard failure if any code asks for a real culture), and the analyzers CA1305 (specify IFormatProvider ), CA1307 and CA1309 (specify / use ordinal StringComparison ) find these call sites mechanically.
Turning those on in a mature codebase is a genuinely senior piece of work, the diff is large, and every suppression needs a reason.

In the real world: a pricing importer ran green for a year and then produced catalogue prices inflated by a thousand, but only for one customer. That customer's file came from a system that wrote 1.234 for one-point-two-three-four; every other customer sent 1234.00.
The importer used decimal.Parse(field) with no provider, and the container it ran in had picked up a European locale from a base-image change, so 1.234 parsed as 1234. The prices with no decimal point were unaffected, which is why the bug looked customer-specific rather than environmental.
Two changes shipped: CultureInfo.InvariantCulture on every parse in the ingest path, and CA1305 promoted to an error so the next one cannot merge. The interview-ready version of the lesson: a parse without an explicit IFormatProvider is a call whose behaviour is set by an environment variable.

-- pause --
Control flow.

if / else, standard. Curly braces optional for single statements but you should always use them.

switch statement, match by value, falls through requires explicit case X: case Y: (no implicit fallthrough; goto case for explicit). Each case must end with break, return, throw, or goto.

switch expression, modern (C sharp 8+). No break, no case, just pattern goes to result:

A caveat that belongs with conversions: exhaustiveness over an enum is not a guarantee. Any integer can be cast to any enum type without validation, (DayOfWeek)99 is legal, prints 99, and Enum.IsDefined returns false for it.
A switch expression that covers every declared member and omits _ compiles with a warning and throws SwitchExpressionException at run time when a value arrives from a database column, a deserialiser, or a cast. Keep the discard arm and make it throw something diagnosable.

In the real world: an order-status switch expression covered all five declared members of the enum, so the team deleted the arm to satisfy a "no dead code" lint rule.
Months later a partner integration wrote a 6 into the status column directly, E F Core materialised it into the enum without complaint, enum conversion performs no validation, and the endpoint began returning 500 seconds with SwitchExpressionException,
whose message names the unmatched value but not the row.
The lasting fix was two-part: a goes to throw new InvalidOperationException($"Unhandled status {(int)status} on order {id}") arm that puts the identifier in the message, and validation at the persistence boundary with Enum.IsDefined.
The interview-shaped lesson: an enum is an int with names attached, and every value that arrives from outside your process is an int.

Loops:
for (init; condition; update) {. }, classic.
while (condition) {. }, pre-test.
do {. } while (condition);, post-test (executes at least once).
foreach (var x in collection) {. }, sugar over IEnumerable / IEnumerator. Calls GetEnumerator() then iterates.

break / continue / return: as expected. goto: legal but ugly outside of goto case in switch and rare cleanup patterns; avoid.

-- pause --
Methods and parameters.

Parameter modifiers:
(none), pass by value (for value types: a copy; for reference types: the reference itself, copied).
ref, pass by reference. Caller's variable can be reassigned.
out, pass by reference, but caller doesn't need to assign first; method must assign before returning.
in, pass by reference, but read-only (no reassignment, no mutation if struct).
params, variadic (caller can pass 0.N values; method receives an array, or any IEnumerable since C sharp 13).

Optional and named arguments:

Optional-parameter defaults are baked into the caller, exactly like const. Greet("Alice") compiles to Greet("Alice", "Hello", false), the default values are copied into the call site at the caller's compile time, not looked up at run time.
Change the default in a library and every consumer that isn't recompiled keeps the old one.
For a public A P I that means an optional parameter's default is part of your binary contract; adding a new optional parameter to a method is also a binary breaking change even though it is source-compatible, because the call site's compiled signature no longer matches.
Overloads do not have that problem, which is why BCL A P Is so often prefer an extra overload to an extra default.

In the real world: a shared H T T P client wrapper had SendAsync(request, int timeout Seconds = 30). During an incident the platform team lowered the default to 5 and shipped a patch release, and the services that had been rebuilt that week picked it up while the rest kept timing out at 30.
Because both behaviours were "the default", nobody could tell from the source which services had which, and the graph showed two clusters of timeout durations with no code difference to explain them.
The rewrite replaced the default with an overload pair and a TimeSpan resolved from options at run time, the general fix for anything a library author expects to tune later.

Local functions, methods nested inside other methods. Cleaner than private helper methods when only one caller exists; can capture locals like a closure.

-- pause --
ref / out / in, parameter semantics at the I L level.

Surface-level: ref is in-out, out is out-only, in is read-only. Senior-level: all three emit the same I L opcode ( ldarga, address-of-argument) and the only difference is the contract the C sharp compiler enforces. Understanding that single fact resolves a half-dozen interview cross-questions.

The properties box:

The same and T byref under the hood, three different contracts the compiler enforces.

When each is correct:

The in defensive-copy trap. This is the cross-question every senior interviewer reaches for:

The fix, either annotate the method readonly, or make the whole struct readonly:

The readonly struct form is cleaner and is what Span, Memory, Vector3, and most modern value types use.

In the real world: a geometry-heavy service profiled a hot intersection test and found it spending its time in memcpy -shaped work rather than arithmetic. The struct was 64 bytes and every method took it in, which the author had added specifically to avoid copies.
It was a mutable struct with ordinary (non- readonly ) property getters, so every single property access inside those methods emitted a defensive copy, the in had increased the number of copies, because before the change the struct was copied once on entry and then read from a local.
Marking the type readonly struct removed the copies without touching a single call site. The reusable diagnostic: if in didn't help, the type is probably not readonly, and the copies moved rather than disappeared.

ref returns and ref locals (C sharp 7, sharpened in dot NET 7+):

ref returns are how Span 's indexer and the CollectionsMarshal helpers avoid copying:
CollectionsMarshal.AsSpan(list) hands you a Span over a List 's backing array, and CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef(dict, key) returns a ref TValue into the dictionary's entry array so you can update a value in place with one lookup instead of two.
(Both live in System.Runtime.InteropServices, AsSpan since dot NET 5, GetValueRefOrNullRef since dot NET 6, and both are named "Marshal" as a warning:
adding to or removing from the collection while the ref or span is alive is undefined behaviour, because the backing array can be reallocated underneath you.) Powerful but easy to misuse, if the underlying storage is freed or relocated, the ref dangles.
The compiler enforces what it can statically; the rest is on you.

ref readonly parameters (C sharp 12), the modifier in should have been.
in is silently forgiving at the call site: it accepts literals, properties and implicitly-converted arguments by manufacturing a hidden temporary, so a caller can think they are passing by reference while the compiler quietly makes a copy.
ref readonly closes that hole by making the call site say what it means:

Use ref readonly for new A P Is where passing by reference is the point (large structs, interop buffers); keep in where you want callers to be able to pass anything conveniently.
Note also that ref, in, ref readonly and out cannot be used to overload each other, a compiler error if two members differ only by which of them they use, so switching an existing public A P I from in to ref readonly is a source-compatible change for callers who already pass in,
and a new warning for everyone else.

-- pause --
params arrays and collection-expression parameters (C sharp 12+).

params lets a method accept a variable number of arguments. The historical implementation is an array; in modern C sharp the compiler can pick a more efficient representation.

Classic params array:

The cost: every variadic call site allocates an array on the heap (unless the compiler can prove the array is empty and reuse Array.Empty() ). In a hot path called millions of times, that's millions of arrays for the garbage collector.

params ReadOnlySpan (C sharp 13+): the compiler can stack-allocate the array for params ReadOnlySpan parameters, zero heap allocation:

params IEnumerable (also C sharp 13+): for when you want to forward to link-style consumers:

When to prefer which signature:

params T[], Heap array per call, Legacy compat; not perf-critical.
params ReadOnlySpan, Stack-allocated, Hot paths, modern C sharp 13+.
params IEnumerable, Boxes if needed, You forward to link-style consumers.
IEnumerable (no params ), None (caller controls), Caller already has a collection, don't force them to splat.

Senior rule of thumb: prefer non- params IEnumerable for library A P Is that don't need positional-call ergonomics. params is convenient at the call site ( Log("msg", arg1, arg2) ) but every call pays an allocation in the array form.
Logger libraries ( Microsoft.Extensions.Logging ) sidestep this with source-generated overloads.

In the real world:
dot NET 9 added params ReadOnlySpan overloads to a long list of BCL methods, string.Format, string.Join, string.Concat, StringBuilder.AppendFormat, Task.WhenAll, Path.Combine and more, and C sharp 13 prefers the span overload over the array one when a call passes arguments individually.
Teams got the allocation win by recompiling, with no source change. One team also got a build break: their call to string.Join sat inside an Expression> lambda, expression trees cannot contain a ref struct, and the compiler reported CS8640 / CS9226.
The documented workaround is to pass an explicit array so the call binds back to the array overload. It is a good illustration of a senior-level habit, when a recompile changes behaviour, the cause is often overload resolution seeing a new candidate, not the runtime changing its mind.

-- pause --
Strings, the surprisingly deep type.

string in C sharp is immutable and reference-typed, but with value-like equality semantics ( == compares contents, not references). Every "modification" of a string allocates a new one.

Five ways to build strings:

Verbatim and raw strings:

Raw strings ( """.""" ) are a 2022 addition. They:
Need at least 3 quotes (more if the content contains 3 quotes).
Strip leading whitespace based on the closing """ indent.
Combine with interpolation: $""".""" (and $$""".""" for content containing { ).

UTF-8 string literals (C sharp 11): "hello"u8 produces a ReadOnlySpan of UTF-8 bytes, useful for low-allocation H T T P or file or network code:

-- pause --
Text is code units, not characters, surrogate pairs, Rune, and comparison.

string is a sequence of char, and a char is a UTF-16 code unit, not a character. Everything follows from that one sentence, and it is the difference between a candidate who has shipped internationalised software and one who has not.

Length counts code units. Any character outside the Basic Multilingual Plane, emoji, many CJK extensions, historic scripts, some mathematical symbols, is stored as a surrogate pair: two char values that only mean something together.

Three legitimate answers to "how long is this string", and the one you get by default is the one nobody means. Worse, Substring, [.n] and any hand-rolled truncation can cut a pair in half:

A lone surrogate is not valid Unicode. It renders as, and it will be rejected or silently mangled by anything that re-encodes it, a UTF-8 database column, a Jason serialiser, a downstream Java service. This is the actual mechanism behind "the display name broke when we added the 20-character limit".

The three tools, in increasing order of correctness:

char, One UTF-16 code unit, ASCII-only parsing, delimiters, digits.
System.Text.Rune (dot NET Core 3.0+), One Unicode scalar value, Character-by-character processing that must not split pairs.
StringInfo / text elements, One grapheme cluster (what a user sees), Truncation, cursor movement, "N characters" limits.

A grapheme cluster can be several scalars, an emoji with a skin-tone modifier, or e plus a combining accent, so StringInfo is the only one that matches human intuition. Truncating for display? Use text elements. Validating a protocol field? Use Rune or bytes.

Comparison: ordinal by default in some places, culture-sensitive in others. This is the trap, because the defaults are not consistent and the docs say so:

Two methods on the same class, differing only in whether the argument is a char or a string, use different comparison rules.
Microsoft Learn's own recommendation is to never rely on the default: pass a StringComparison at every call site, and use Ordinal / OrdinalIgnoreCase as the safe default for anything non-linguistic.

Two strings that look identical can compare unequal, and vice versa.

== is ordinal, so it says these are different strings, which they are, byte for byte. A linguistic comparison says they are the same, which they also are, to a reader.
If you need them to match, normalise first ( s.Normalize(NormalizationForm.FormC) ), typically at the point of input rather than at each comparison. This is why usernames and email addresses are normalised on the way into the database and compared ordinally afterwards.

The Turkish-I problem is the canonical security-relevant case, and Microsoft Learn documents it as such: Turkish ( tr-TR ) and Azerbaijani have a dotted capital İ and a dotless lowercase ı, so i does not uppercase to I.

A IsFileUri -style check written with a culture-sensitive case-insensitive comparison passes on an English server and fails on a Turkish one, Learn spells out the consequence:
"on Turkish systems, someone could circumvent security measures that block access to case-insensitive URIs that begin with FILE:".
Any case-insensitive check on a scheme, header, file extension, role name or feature flag must be OrdinalIgnoreCase.
And when normalising case for comparison, Learn recommends ToUpperInvariant over ToLowerInvariant: OrdinalIgnoreCase is itself described as the composition of ToUpperInvariant on both arguments plus an ordinal comparison, so uppercase is the direction the runtime already agrees with.

In the real world: a support ticket said "profile names with emoji get corrupted after editing".
The A P I truncated display names to 50 with name[.50], which occasionally split a surrogate pair; the lone surrogate survived in the dot NET string, failed to encode as valid UTF-8 on the way into the message bus, and arrived downstream as a replacement character.
Nobody could reproduce it because it only happened when the 50th code unit landed mid-pair. The fix was StringInfo -based truncation on text elements, which also stopped chopping accented characters away from their base letters, a milder bug the team hadn't yet had reported.
The reusable framing: Length is a storage measurement, and every user-facing limit is a display measurement.

In the real world: a feature-flag check written as if (header.ToLower() == "enabled") shipped for years.
It allocated a string on every request, which was the reason it was flagged in a profiler, but the review found the worse problem:
the service had just been deployed to a region whose container image set a Turkish locale, and ToLower() on the ambient culture turned "ENABLED" into "enabled" with a dotless ı.
The flag silently read as off for that region only.
Rewriting it as string.Equals(header, "enabled", StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase) removed the allocation and the correctness bug in one edit, which is the usual outcome: on strings, the ordinal path is both the faster one and the one that means what you intended.

-- pause --
String interning and reference identity.

C sharp strings are immutable, and the C L R exploits that immutability to intern identical literal strings, store exactly one instance in a process-wide pool. This is why ReferenceEquals does counter-intuitive things with strings.

The intern pool:

Three ways a string ends up interned:

String literals in source code, interned automatically by the jit or runtime.
const string, interned (it's a literal at the I L level).
string.Intern(s), manually add a dynamically-built string to the pool, returning the pooled instance.

Three ways a string does NOT end up interned:

Strings built at runtime ( s + "x", string.Format(.), new string(.), StringBuilder.ToString() ).
Strings read from files, network, or any IO.
Anything Substring 'd, Trim 'd, ToLower 'd from another string.

Why immutable + interned together? If strings were mutable, interning would be a disaster: one caller's .Replace('A', 'X') would change every other caller's "ABC".
Immutability is what makes the pool safe, and the pool is what makes string literal comparison ultra-cheap (a reference comparison is one instruction).

Performance implications:

== on string is content-equal, not identity. Internally it short-circuits: if ReferenceEquals is true, return true immediately; otherwise compare characters. For interned strings the fast path always wins.
Don't Intern runtime-built strings as an optimization, the pool grows for the entire process lifetime; it's never collected. Frequent interning of random strings is a slow memory leak.
Why does this matter for Dictionary? The dictionary hashes and compares by content ( string.GetHashCode + string.Equals ), so interning doesn't speed up lookups. The pool's only direct benefit is reference-equality fast paths.

In the real world: a multi-tenant A P I held a Dictionary and someone "optimised" the lookup by calling string.Intern(tenant Id) on every incoming request, reasoning that interned keys would make comparisons cheaper.
Tenant ids arrive from the wire and are therefore all distinct instances, so every request added a new entry to a pool that is never collected for the lifetime of the process. Memory grew slowly and monotonically and survived every Gen 2 collection.
The strings do show up in a heap dump, they are ordinary System.String instances, but rooted by the runtime's intern table rather than by any application object, so the usual "who holds a reference to this?" path leads back to the runtime and looks like framework overhead.
That is what made it take weeks to find. The correct optimisation was StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase on the dictionary, which fixes the comparison semantics (the real bug, since tenant ids arrived in mixed case) and costs nothing.

The immutability versus StringBuilder perf story. Because strings are immutable, every "modification" allocates. In a loop:

Choosing between them is about shape, not a threshold.
A fixed, known set of parts ( a + b + c, or one interpolated string) compiles to a single string.Concat / DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler call that allocates the result once, a StringBuilder there just adds its own object and buffer for no benefit.
An unbounded loop is the opposite: the concatenation's cost is quadratic in the number of appends and the builder's is linear, so the builder wins and keeps winning.
For a known final length in a hot path, string.Create(length, state, (span, s) goes to.) allocates exactly the one string and fills it in place.

In the real world: an export endpoint built CSV with csv += line + "\n" inside a foreach. It was invisible for a year at a few hundred rows.
A customer with tens of thousands of rows turned it into a request that took minutes and pushed the process into repeated Gen 2 collections, because every iteration allocated a string the size of the entire file so far, and the later ones were large enough to land straight on the Large Object Heap.
The tell in the garbage collector trace was not the allocation count but the allocation sizes climbing linearly.
Swapping to StringBuilder fixed the incident in one line; streaming directly to the response body with PipeWriter fixed the class of problem, because the export then never held the whole file in memory at all.

-- pause --
nameof and typeof, compile-time strings versus runtime type tokens.

Two operators that look like function calls but are evaluated at compile time. Mixing them up is a senior-interview pitfall.

nameof(x), compile-time string literal:

Why it matters: nameof makes string references refactor-safe. The IDE's "Rename" command updates every nameof(Foo) automatically; a hard-coded "Foo" string requires manual search-and-replace and is a perpetual source of stale messages.

Use cases:
ArgumentNullException, ArgumentException, ArgumentOutOfRangeException, pass parameter names as strings.
INotifyPropertyChanged.PropertyChanged event, pass property names.
Logging structured fields by name.
A S P dot NET routing / model binding errors.

typeof(T), compile-time Type token:

obj.GetType(), runtime type:

Comparison summary:

nameof(x), Compile time, string (literal), Yes, Exception args, logging keys, INotifyPropertyChanged.
typeof(T), Compile time, System.Type, Yes, Reflection, generic type creation, attribute filtering.
obj.GetType(), Runtime, System.Type, Yes (it's the object's runtime type), Polymorphic dispatch, type-switching at runtime.

Common pitfalls:

nameof(SomeClass.Method()) is illegal. nameof accepts an expression that names something, nameof(SomeClass.Method) is fine (returns "Method" ), but invoking the method makes no sense at compile time.
nameof of a fully-qualified name returns just the last segment. nameof(System.Collections.Generic.List) returns "List", not "List". (Use typeof(List).Name for the full name.)
Confusing typeof(T) and default(T). typeof(int) is a Type object (the metadata); default(int) is 0 (the value). Both are compile-time, very different.
Using strings instead of nameof in attributes. [CallerMemberName] and similar attributes accept string parameters at the A P I boundary; nameof is preferred everywhere it's syntactically allowed.

In the real world: a validation layer built error keys as "Order.CustomerId" string literals so the front end could map them to form fields.
A refactor renamed CustomerId to BuyerId; the compiler was happy, the tests were happy (they asserted on the same literals), and the form stopped highlighting the offending field in production, the error arrived with a key nothing was listening for.
Rewriting the keys as $"{nameof(Order)}.{nameof(Order.CustomerId)}" made the next rename a compile-time event.
The general principle worth stating in an interview: nameof converts a class of silent runtime drift into a class of build failures, which is the trade every refactoring-safe A P I is making.

-- pause --
Namespaces and using directives.

Namespaces group types. The standard C L R convention is Company.Project.Layer:

Older block-scoped form (still valid):

Prefer file-scoped, one namespace per file is the modern convention, and the saved indentation level reads better.

using directives:

global using is best placed in a single GlobalUsings.cs file at project root. Modern S D K projects auto-include common globals: System, System.Collections.Generic, System.Linq, et cetera

In the real world: a team added global using MyCompany.Extensions; to cut boilerplate, and a week later an unrelated file started resolving Where to their own extension method instead of System.Linq 's, because theirs was a closer match on a List receiver.
The build passed; the behaviour changed, because their version evaluated eagerly. Nothing in the affected file had been edited, and nothing in it mentioned the new namespace, the whole cause lived in a file the reviewer never opened.
The rule the team adopted afterwards is a good one to be able to state: global using is for namespaces with no chance of ambiguity ( System.*, your own DTO namespace), never for a namespace containing extension methods on framework types.
Disabling and listing globals explicitly makes the set reviewable in one place.

-- pause --
Top-level statements.

C sharp 9 introduced top-level statements, a program can omit the class Program { static void Main(.) {. } } ceremony:

The compiler synthesizes a hidden Program.Main for you. Only one file in a project may contain top-level statements. Modern templates ( dotnet new web, dotnet new console ) use this form by default.

In the real world: the first integration test written against a minimal-A P I service failed to compile with "Program is inaccessible due to its protection level", WebApplicationFactory needs the entry-point type, and the synthesized one is internal.
The two-line fix is public partial class Program { } at the bottom of Program.cs (partial, so it merges with the generated half) or an InternalsVisibleTo for the test assembly.
It is worth knowing cold, because it is the first thing that goes wrong when a team moves from controllers to minimal A P Is and it looks like a testing-framework problem rather than a language one.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

Default values for built-in types:

numeric (int, double, decimal, et cetera), maps to, 0.
bool, maps to, false.
char, maps to, '\0'.
reference types (string, object, classes), maps to, null.
structs, maps to, all fields set to their default.
enums, maps to, 0 (whether or not the value is named).

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

Using == for floating-point equality. IEEE-754 isn't exact. 0.1 + 0.2 != 0.3. Use Math.Abs(a - b) < epsilon or, for money, switch to decimal.
Mutating a string and expecting it to change. s.Replace("a", "b") returns a new string, the original is unchanged. Same for Trim, ToLower, Substring.
int overflow silent by default. If you're computing offsets, sizes, or anything that could overflow, wrap in checked or set true project-wide.
Implicit int to long conversion forgetting overflow. long milliseconds = int.MaxValue * 1000; overflows in int before assigning to long. Cast first: long milliseconds = (long)int.MaxValue * 1000;.
var with literal 0 locks in int. var x = 0; is int. If you wanted long or double, write 0L or 0.0 (or use the explicit type).
Forgetting out parameter must be assigned. Compiler enforces this, but if you're chaining through helper methods, you'll hit a wall. Assign at the top of the method (often result = default; ) and you're safe.
Default lambda parameters (C sharp 12) feel like overloads but aren't. (int x = 5) goes to x * 2 produces one lambda with a default. It's not two overloads. Reflection over Method.GetParameters() shows one parameter.
@"" raw-style strings versus """.""" raw strings. Different things. @"." is a verbatim string (still interprets "" as " ). """.""" is a raw string (literally everything between the quotes). New code should prefer raw strings.
Parsing or formatting without an IFormatProvider. double.Parse("1.5") returns 15 on a de-DE thread. Pass CultureInfo.InvariantCulture for anything machine-readable and turn on CA1305.
Case-insensitive comparison via ToLower() / ToUpper() or a culture-sensitive overload. Allocates, and breaks on Turkish locales. Use string.Equals(a, b, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase).
Treating string.Length as a character count. It counts UTF-16 code units; emoji and other non-BMP characters are two. Truncating on Length can split a surrogate pair and produce invalid text. Use StringInfo text elements for display limits, Rune for scalar-by-scalar work.
public const in a shared library. The value is copied into every consumer at their compile time, so changing it does nothing until each one is rebuilt. Use static readonly for anything tunable, and note that optional-parameter defaults are baked in the same way.
Capturing a for loop variable in a lambda. All the delegates share one variable and see its final value. foreach variables are per-iteration and safe; for for, copy into a loop-local first.
Assuming a switch expression over an enum is exhaustive. Any int can be cast to any enum without validation, so a value from a database or deserialiser can reach a switch with no matching arm and throw SwitchExpressionException. Keep a _ arm that throws something diagnosable.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

C sharp is statically typed, garbage-collected, multi-paradigm (OOP + functional + imperative).
15 primitive types map to C L R System.* types, int ≡ System.Int32. Suffixes pick non-default literal types ( 5L, 5.0m, 5U ).
var is implicit static typing, not dynamic. dynamic is true runtime typing (rarely used, slower, no IntelliSense).
Definite assignment, locals must be assigned before read; fields auto-default. The compiler enforces this.
Strings are immutable reference types with value-like equality. Use StringBuilder for tight loops, string.Create for hot paths, raw strings ( """ ) for embedded Jason or sequel.
Parameter modifiers: ref (in or out reference), out (must assign), in (read-only reference, often used with structs to avoid copies), params (variadic).
Null operators: ?. (conditional access), ?? (coalescing), ??= (coalescing assignment),! (forgiving, compile-time hint, no runtime effect).
Top-level statements (C sharp 9) + file-scoped namespaces (C sharp 10) + global usings (C sharp 10) = modern minimal-ceremony C sharp.
switch expression > switch statement in modern code: terser, exhaustiveness-checked, no fallthrough hazard, but enum exhaustiveness is not a runtime guarantee, since any int casts to any enum.
Integer arithmetic is silent-wrap by default. Use checked for safety-critical math; the project flag's biggest win is turning silent narrowing conversions into exceptions.
Implicit conversions preserve magnitude, not precision. int to float and long to double are implicit and lossy. Small integer types promote to int for arithmetic, and compound assignment silently inserts the narrowing cast back.
Casting truncates; Convert / Math.Round round half-to-even. State MidpointRounding explicitly on anything financial. dot NET 7+ generic math names the three policies: CreateChecked, CreateSaturating, CreateTruncating.
Text conversions are culture-sensitive by default. InvariantCulture for machines, CurrentCulture for humans, StringComparison.Ordinal for identifiers. IndexOf(char) is ordinal while IndexOf(string) is linguistic.
char is a UTF-16 code unit, not a character. Rune for scalars, StringInfo text elements for what users see.
Captured variables move to a heap display class. for shares one variable across iterations, foreach gives one per iteration; static lambdas and local functions make "captures nothing" a compile-time guarantee.
const and optional-parameter defaults are copied into callers at compile time. static readonly and overloads are the versioning-safe alternatives across assembly boundaries.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this section once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, checked versus unchecked overflow.

Q: What does int.MaxValue + 1 return in C sharp?-- think --

A: int.MinValue, -2147483648. C sharp integer arithmetic is silently wrapping by default (no exception). The I L opcode is add, not add.ovf.

Cross-Q: How do you make it throw instead of wrap?-- think --

A: Three scopes. (1) Expression: checked(int.MaxValue + 1). (2) Block: checked {. }. (3) Project-wide via true in the .csproj. The first two emit add.ovf I L; the third flips the default for the whole assembly.

Cross-Q²: What's the runtime cost of checked arithmetic, and when would you unchecked inside a checked project?-- think --

A: add.ovf adds a check of the C P U's overflow flag plus a branch to a throw helper, and because the operation can now throw, the jit loses some freedom to reorder and vectorise the surrounding code.
That is noise in business logic and real in a numeric kernel, quote the mechanism, not a multiplier, and say you'd measure the specific loop with BenchmarkDotNet. Inside a checked project, you'd unchecked {.
} around CRCs, hash mixing, ring-buffer counters, and pseudo-random number generators, code that intentionally wraps as part of the algorithm. The checked default catches accidents; explicit unchecked documents the intent of the rare correct overflow.

-- pause --
Drill 2, ref versus out versus in I L semantics.

Q: What's the difference between ref, out, and in parameters?-- think --

A: At the I L level they emit the same byref opcode ( and T ). The difference is purely the contract the C sharp compiler enforces. out requires the callee to assign before returning and exempts the caller from pre-assignment.
ref requires the caller to pre-assign and lets the callee freely read or write.
in is a readonly byref, caller pre-assigns, callee can read but not mutate.

Cross-Q: What's the "defensive copy" trap with in ?-- think --

A: If you pass a mutable struct via in, and call a non- readonly method on it, the compiler silently emits a defensive copy of the struct on the stack, because the method might mutate, but the in contract forbids that. The "avoid the copy" perf benefit of in is destroyed.
Fix: mark the method readonly on the struct, or make the entire struct a readonly struct.

Cross-Q²: What's ref readonly return and when would you use it?-- think --

A: A method that returns a reference into a backing store, but the caller can't mutate through it. Example: public ref readonly Item GetSlot(int i) goes to ref _items[i];. The caller gets a zero-copy alias for read-only access, no defensive copy, no heap allocation, no chance of accidental mutation.
Span.this[int] returns ref readonly T for ReadOnlySpan. Use when you want span-like ergonomics for one element of a backing collection.

-- pause --
Drill 3, String interning and reference equality.

Q: string a = "hello"; string b = "hello"; ReferenceEquals(a, b), true or false?-- think --

A: True. String literals are automatically interned by the runtime, both a and b point at the single pooled instance for "hello". The C L R exploits string immutability to share literals across the entire process.

Cross-Q: What about string c = new string('h', 1) + "ello"; ReferenceEquals(a, c) ?-- think --

A: False. Strings built at runtime (via new, +, string.Format, StringBuilder.ToString, Substring, IO, et cetera) bypass the intern pool. c is a distinct heap allocation. a == c is still true because string.== compares content; ReferenceEquals exposes the identity divergence.

Cross-Q²: Should I string.Intern runtime-built strings as an optimization?-- think --

A: Almost never. The intern pool is never garbage-collected for the lifetime of the process, manually interning random strings is a slow memory leak. The pool exists to share literal strings, not arbitrary runtime values.
The right answer for high-frequency string keys is usually Dictionary with a normalization step, or a custom IEqualityComparer keyed off a hash.

-- pause --
Drill 4, decimal versus double for money.

Q: Why is decimal the right type for money and double the wrong one?-- think --

A: double is base-2 floating point, most "nice" decimal fractions ( 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 ) can't be represented exactly in binary. 0.1 + 0.2 == 0.3 is false in double.
decimal stores a 96-bit integer with a base-10 scale factor (0, 28), so it represents every base-10 fraction inside 28-29 significant digits exactly.
The decisive argument isn't the size of the error, it's that binary rounding isn't reproducible across different orders of operation, two systems can each round correctly and still disagree, and no amount of rounding at the end reconciles them.
For values an accountant tracks, decimal is non-negotiable. (Note what decimal does not buy you: 1 or 3.0m * 3 is still 0.9999999999999999999999999999. Exact representation, not exact arithmetic.)

Cross-Q: What's the perf cost of choosing decimal ?-- think --

A: Give the mechanism, not a multiplier.
double add or multiply are single C P U instructions that vectorise across a SIMD register; decimal arithmetic is a software routine that must align two scale factors before operating on 96-bit integers, and the type is 16 bytes against 8, so it costs cache and memory bandwidth too.
That's a large gap in a numeric inner loop (Monte Carlo, simulation) and invisible next to a single database round-trip in a business app.
If the interviewer wants a number, the correct answer is "I'd measure it with BenchmarkDotNet for that loop", quoting a remembered multiplier is how people get caught.

Cross-Q²: When would you use float over double ?-- think --

A: Almost never in business code. float (~7 digits of precision) is rarely "enough", double has the same speed on modern hardware and 15-17 digits.
float makes sense only for (1) huge arrays where the 2 times memory difference enables SIMD wider lanes (graphics shaders, ML tensors); (2) sensor / hardware interop where the wire format is 32-bit (audio samples, GPU vertex buffers);
(3) legacy game engines that committed to 32-bit precision a decade ago.
Default for "a real number" is double; default for "a monetary value" is decimal; float requires justification.

-- pause --
Drill 5, params allocation cost.

Q: Does void Log(string fmt, params object[] args) allocate on every call?-- think --

A: Yes, even Log("ok") with zero args allocates an empty object[] (or reuses Array.Empty() since dot NET Core 2.0). Calls with value-type args (like Log("count: {0}", 5) ) also box each value into the object[] slot.
For a logger called millions of times, that's millions of array allocations plus boxing pressure.

Cross-Q: How do modern logging libraries avoid this?-- think --

A: Source generators and strongly-typed delegates. LoggerMessage.Define(.) and the [LoggerMessage] source generator produce typed wrappers that never allocate an object[] and never box, and they check ILogger.IsEnabled before formatting anything.
Be careful with the common wrong answer here:
the ILogger extension methods do not have interpolated-string-handler overloads (the A P I proposal to add them, dotnet or runtime #111283, was closed as not planned), so logger.LogInformation($"User {id} logged in") formats the string eagerly and destroys the structured-logging template.
Debug.Assert is the A P I that genuinely does use one ( AssertInterpolatedStringHandler, added in dot NET 6), which only evaluates the interpolation when the assert fails.

Cross-Q²: What about params ReadOnlySpan from C sharp 13?-- think --

A: The compiler stack-allocates the array for params ReadOnlySpan parameters, zero heap allocation, zero boxing for value types. So Sum(1, 2, 3) where Sum(params ReadOnlySpan) is allocation-free.
This is the closest the language gets to "have your variadic cake and eat your perf budget too." It's why dot NET 9+'s string.Format overloads added params ReadOnlySpan variants.

-- pause --
Drill 6, nameof versus string literal.

Q: Why use nameof(name) instead of just "name" in throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(name)) ?-- think --

A: Refactor safety. nameof(name) is a compile-time operator that produces the string "name", but if I rename the parameter to username in the IDE, the compiler updates the nameof to nameof(username) automatically.
A hard-coded "name" string survives the rename and silently reports the wrong parameter name to the caller forever.

Cross-Q: What does nameof(System.Collections.Generic.List) return?-- think --

A: "List", just the last segment. nameof returns the simple name, not the fully-qualified name and not the generic-arity-decorated form. For the full name, use typeof(List).FullName. For just the type name, typeof(List).Name returns "List\ 1".

Cross-Q²: Is nameof(SomeClass.Method()) legal?-- think --

A: No, compile error. nameof accepts a symbol reference, not an invocation. nameof(SomeClass.Method) is legal (returns "Method" ); nameof(SomeClass.Method()) makes no sense, there's no name to extract from "the result of calling Method".
Similarly nameof(x + y) is illegal because x + y isn't a name.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Boxing of integer constants in object.

Q: object o = 5; object p = 5;, does ReferenceEquals(o, p) return true?-- think --

A: False. Each assignment boxes the int 5 into a fresh heap object, two distinct boxes containing the same value. There is no automatic interning of value-type boxes (unlike string literals).

Cross-Q: What about Java's Integer.value Of caching?-- think --

A: Java caches Integer instances for -128.127 (the so-called integer cache). C sharp does NOT, every box is a fresh allocation.
The reasoning: in C sharp, int and Int32 are the same type with a value-type identity, and boxing is supposed to be the "escape hatch" you avoid via generics; making it implicitly cached would mask the cost. So (object)5 != (object)5 by reference in C sharp.

Cross-Q²: How would you make two int -as-objects compare equal by reference?-- think --

A: You wouldn't, that's the wrong tool. Use Equals or == to compare values: o.Equals(p) returns true. If you need a single shared instance for some optimization, manually intern via a Dictionary.
But the correct answer for "I want to compare two boxed ints" is almost always "don't box in the first place", use a generic method or IEquatable.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Default values of fields versus locals.

Q: Why does int x; Console.WriteLine(x); fail to compile, but class C { int x; void M() goes to Console.WriteLine(x); } works fine?-- think --

A: Definite assignment rule for locals. The C sharp compiler requires local variables to be assigned before they're read, this is a compile-time check (CS0165).
Fields, on the other hand, are auto-initialized to their default value ( 0 for int, null for reference types, default(T) for structs) when the containing object is allocated.

Cross-Q: Why does the language treat them differently?-- think --

A: Fields' lifetime is bound to their containing object, and the runtime guarantees zero-init on heap allocations (the C L R clears memory), so a field always has a defined value the moment the object exists.
A local has no such moment, its storage is a stack slot reused across calls, so the language demands proof that a write precedes every read. Be precise about the mechanism: C sharp does emit the .locals init flag by default, so the stack frame is zeroed too.
Definite assignment isn't there to substitute for zeroing; it's a correctness rule that catches "you forgot to set this" at compile time. What it enables is the next answer.

Cross-Q²: What's SkipLocalsInitAttribute ?-- think --

A: An attribute (C sharp 9 / dot NET 5) that removes the .locals init I L flag, so the stack frame is no longer zeroed on method entry. [module: SkipLocalsInit] applies it to a whole assembly.
It's safe for ordinary locals precisely because definite assignment already proves every read follows a write, the language rule is what makes the optimisation legal.
It is not safe for stackalloc, which then hands you whatever was on the stack: with SkipLocalsInit on, a stackalloc buffer contains garbage rather than zeros, so anything reading before writing leaks previous stack contents.
That's the whole trade: the win is real for parsers and IO paths that stackalloc large buffers and fill them completely; the hazard is code that assumed zeros.

-- pause --
Drill 9, var versus explicit type.

Q: Is var x = 5; the same as int x = 5; ?-- think --

A: Identically, var is implicit static typing, not dynamic. The compiler infers the type at compile time and locks it in. The resulting I L is byte-identical to the explicit-type version.

Cross-Q: When does the choice matter?-- think --

A: Readability and consistency. (1) When the type is obvious from the right-hand side ( var users = new List() ), var reduces noise. (2) When the type is not obvious ( var result = SomeMethod(); ), explicit types document intent, reviewers shouldn't need to hover to know the return type.
(3) For literals, var x = 0 locks in int, if you wanted long or double, you'd write 0L or 0.0, or use the explicit type. Style guides vary; the StyleCop rule is var only when the RHS is a new expression or a cast.

Cross-Q²: What's the difference between var, dynamic, and object ?-- think --

A: var = compile-time type inference; full static typing, full IntelliSense, zero runtime cost, the emitted I L is identical to writing the type.
dynamic = the static type is object plus an instruction to defer binding: every member access becomes a DLR call site that resolves the member at run time, allocates and caches a binder, and can throw RuntimeBinderException.
Describe that cost as "a cached call-site lookup and a delegate invocation instead of a direct call" rather than a multiplier; the exact factor depends on whether the call site's cache hits. object = a static type that needs explicit casts to do anything useful.
Default to var where the right-hand side makes the type obvious; reach for dynamic only for COM interop, ExpandoObject, or traversing genuinely unknown Jason shapes.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Top-level statements and Program.cs.

Q: What does Console.WriteLine("hi"); at the top of Program.cs compile to?-- think --

A: The compiler synthesizes a hidden Program class with a Main method around your top-level code. Roughly: internal class Program { static async Task Main(string[] args) {. your code. } }.
The args parameter is implicitly in scope, the return type is inferred ( int if you return n;, void otherwise), and the method is async if you await.

Cross-Q: Why is there exactly one allowed top-level-statement file per project?-- think --

A: Because only one Main method is allowed per executable, and top-level statements are the Main. The compiler errors out if two files contain top-level statements.
You also can't declare another Program class in the project (unless it's partial with the synthesized one), the compiler reserves the name.

Cross-Q²: Can I unit-test code in a top-level-statement Program.cs?-- think --

A: Yes, but you have to opt in. Add so the synthesized internal Program class is visible to your test project, then write public partial class Program { } in your main project to make the access modifier explicit.
Alternative: extract the logic into a separate library project and reduce Program.cs to thin wiring, the more common pattern.

-- pause --
Drill 11, using static and when it helps.

Q: What does using static System.Math; do?-- think --

A: Brings the static members of System.Math into scope, so you can write Sqrt(2) instead of Math.Sqrt(2), PI instead of Math.PI. Compile-time only, no runtime cost, no I L changes.

Cross-Q: When is it readable, and when is it noise?-- think --

A: Readable when (a) the type is universally-known math or conversion utilities ( Math, MathF, BitOperations ); (b) the file is doing heavy use of those members (a graphics shader translation, a physics sim).
Noise when (a) the imported type is a domain-specific helper readers won't recognize; (b) the file uses just one or two static calls, the cost of one extra qualifier is less than the cost of "where did Foo come from?".

Cross-Q²: What's the interaction with extension methods?-- think --

A: using static MyStaticClass does NOT bring its extension methods into scope as extension methods, it brings them in as static calls. To use extension methods as obj.Foo() syntax, you need a regular using Namespace;.
Senior code review tells: a file that has both forms ( using N; AND using static N.SomeClass ) usually has a confused author who doesn't know what each does.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Console.WriteLine(null), what prints?.

Q: What does Console.WriteLine(null); print?-- think --

A: Trick question, it doesn't compile. Console.WriteLine has many overloads, and null converts to several of them.
The exact compiler error is CS0121: The call is ambiguous between the following methods or properties: 'Console.WriteLine(char[]?)' and 'Console.WriteLine(string?)', note that it is char[] versus string, not object:
object loses to both, because string and char[] are each more specific, and neither of those two converts to the other, so no winner exists between them.
You must cast: Console.WriteLine((string)null) prints a blank line; Console.WriteLine((object)null) also prints a blank line.

Cross-Q: Why doesn't Console.WriteLine((string?)null) print "null" like Python or JavaScript?-- think --

A: Because dot NET's Console.WriteLine(string value) calls Out.WriteLine(value), which calls TextWriter.WriteLine(string), which writes the string followed by a newline. If the string is null, the implementation short-circuits and writes only the newline.
The "null" literal in output is a JS or Python convention, not a C sharp one. If you want it, use Console.WriteLine(value ?? "null") or $"{value ?? "null"}".

Cross-Q²: What about Console.WriteLine($"{x}") when x is null?-- think --

A: Prints an empty string and a newline. The interpolated string handler calls AppendFormatted(x), which for a null reference just appends nothing. Same with string.Format("{0}", null), formats as empty. If you want to surface "null" explicitly, use x?.ToString() ??
"(null)" in the interpolation: $"{x?.ToString() ?? "(null)"}".

-- pause --
Drill 13, Statement versus expression semantics.

Q: When does C sharp require a statement versus an expression?-- think --

A: Loosely: a statement does, an expression computes. The right-hand side of =, the inside of (.), the body of a switch arm, all expression positions. The body of an if, the body of a method (when not expression-bodied), the body of a loop, statement positions.
C sharp 6+ added expression-bodied sugar ( goes to ) so a single-statement method body can be written as one expression: int Add(int a, int b) goes to a + b;.

Cross-Q: What's the difference between switch statement and switch expression?-- think --

A: switch statement is a control-flow construct, each case ends with break / return / throw / goto, no value is produced, no exhaustiveness check.
switch expression (C sharp 8+) is an expression, each arm has the form pattern goes to result, the whole expression evaluates to one value, and the compiler warns if the patterns aren't exhaustive.
Modern code prefers the expression form; statement form remains for cases where you genuinely need side-effecting branches.

Cross-Q²: Is throw an expression or a statement?-- think --

A: Both, since C sharp 7. throw new Exception(); is a statement. x ?? throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(x)) uses throw as an expression, the throw "produces a value" of any type (it diverges, so the type-checker assigns it the bottom type and accepts it anywhere a value is expected).
Same for the right side of expr? a: throw. or in switch-expression arms.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Definite assignment edge cases.

Q: Does int x; if (cond) x = 1; Console.WriteLine(x); compile?-- think --

A: No, definite-assignment analysis sees a path where cond is false and x is never assigned. Compile error CS0165. The compiler doesn't try to reason about whether cond is always true at runtime; the static analysis is conservative.

Cross-Q: What about int x; if (cond) x = 1; else x = 2; Console.WriteLine(x); ?-- think --

A: Compiles fine. Every path through the if / else assigns x, so the compiler proves x is definitely assigned before the read. The analysis is flow-sensitive at the level of basic blocks.

Cross-Q²: How does out var interact with definite assignment?-- think --

A: int.TryParse("5", out var x); Console.WriteLine(x); is legal, the out parameter contract guarantees TryParse assigns x before returning, regardless of the bool return value (this is out 's defining contract).
The compiler treats out var x as "assignment via a method that promises to write to x," which satisfies definite assignment. This is why TryParse patterns work fluently in C sharp.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Modern C sharp string handling.

Q: What's the difference between @"." and """.""" strings?-- think --

A: @"." is a verbatim string, backslashes are literal, line breaks are part of the string, and "" is the escape for a literal ". """.""" is a raw string (C sharp 11), everything between the opening and closing """ is literal, including any " (up to N-1 quotes where N is the count of opening quotes).
Raw strings also strip common leading whitespace based on the closing """ indent.

Cross-Q: When does each beat the other?-- think --

A: Verbatim wins for short Windows paths ( @"C:\temp" ) and regexes that have many \. Raw strings win for embedded Jason, sequel, X M L, or anything with ", no escaping is needed at all.
For new code in 2026, raw strings are the default for multi-line embedded content; verbatim is mostly used for paths and short single-line content.

Cross-Q²: What's $$""".""" ?-- think --

A: A raw interpolated string where the interpolation hole is {{.}} instead of {.}. The $$ prefix tells the compiler "the interpolation requires two braces to start." This lets you embed Jason (which uses single { } braces) without escaping: $$"""{ "name": "{{name}}" }""".
With a single $, the literal { in the Jason would need to be {{ to escape. The count of $ matches the count of braces needed for an interpolation hole.

-- pause --
Drill 16, Implicit conversions and rounding.

Q: int i = 16_777_217; float f = i;, does this compile, and is i == (int)f ?-- think --

A: It compiles with no cast, because int to float is an implicit conversion. And i == (int)f is False, f is 16,777,216.
Implicit in C sharp means "no loss of magnitude", not "no loss of information": Microsoft Learn states that int / uint / long / ulong / nint / nuint to float and long / ulong / nint / nuint to double can lose precision.
float has 24 bits of significand, so consecutive integers stop being representable past 2²⁴.

Cross-Q: byte a = 200, b = 100;, why does byte c = a + b; fail to compile while a += b; succeeds, and what is a afterwards?-- think --

A: byte, sbyte, short, ushort and char define only ++ and --; every other arithmetic operator promotes its operands to int, so a + b is an int with the value 300 and cannot implicitly narrow back to byte (CS0266).
Compound assignment is defined differently: x op= y means x = (T)(x op y), with an explicit conversion inserted for you. So a += b compiles and a becomes 44, 300 truncated into a byte. In a checked context the same line throws OverflowException instead.

Cross-Q²: (int)2.5, Convert.ToInt32(2.5), Math.Round(2.5), three answers, which are they and why?-- think --

A: 2, 2, 2, but for two different reasons, which is the point. The cast truncates toward zero (so (int)3.5 is 3 and (int)(-2.7) is -2 ).
Convert.ToInt32 and Math.Round round half to even, Learn's wording is "if value is halfway between two whole numbers, the even number is returned; that is, 4.5 is converted to 4, and 5.5 is converted to 6", so Convert.ToInt32(3.5) is 4.
Banker's rounding is unbiased over many values and is what most accounting rules want, and it is not what a reader assumes. Pass MidpointRounding explicitly on anything financial.
For a boundary that must never throw or wrap, dot NET 7+ generic math gives you the policy by name: CreateChecked (throw), CreateSaturating (clamp), CreateTruncating (keep low bits).

-- pause --
Drill 17, Closures and the captured loop variable.

Q: for (int i = 0; i i);, what do the three delegates return?-- think --

A: 3, 3, 3. The for variable is declared once, so the compiler hoists it into a single display-class field that all three lambdas share, and by the time they run the loop has finished and the field holds 3.
Change it to foreach (var i in new[]{0,1,2}) and you get 0, 1, 2, because the foreach iteration variable is a fresh variable per iteration, a deliberate change in C sharp 5 made precisely because the old shared behaviour was a permanent source of bugs.

Cross-Q: What actually happens to a captured local at the I L level?-- think --

A: The compiler generates a display class and rewrites the method: the captured local becomes a field on a heap-allocated instance of that class, and every reference to it, inside the lambda and in the original method body, is rewritten to touch that field.
That is why the lambda and the enclosing method see the same storage, and why the variable's lifetime is now the delegate's lifetime rather than the block's. One allocation per capturing scope, not per captured variable.

Cross-Q²: A singleton holds a Func registered by a scoped service. What's the leak, and how does the language help you prevent it?-- think --

A: If the lambda touches any instance member, it captures this, so the display class roots the whole scoped object, and anything it holds, typically a DbContext, for as long as the singleton lives.
The usual symptom isn't OutOfMemoryException, it's ObjectDisposedException from a captured, already-disposed context, which sends people looking in the wrong place.
The language-level prevention is static lambdas (C sharp 9) and static local functions (C sharp 8): they cannot reference enclosing locals, parameters or this, so an accidental capture becomes a compile error. Resolve what you need inside the callback from an IServiceScopeFactory instead.

-- pause --
Drill 18, Parsing, culture, and the invariant boundary.

Q: On a server whose CurrentCulture is de-DE, what does double.Parse("1.5") return?-- think --

A: 15. No exception, no warning. '.' is the group separator in de-DE, the default NumberStyles for Parse includes AllowThousands, so "1.5" reads as "one thousand five with a stray separator". A parse with no explicit IFormatProvider is a call whose behaviour is decided by an environment variable.

Cross-Q: What's the rule you'd put in a code-review checklist?-- think --

A: Machines talk to machines in InvariantCulture; humans see CurrentCulture; identifiers and protocol tokens aren't a culture question at all and use StringComparison.Ordinal.
Concretely: InvariantCulture for config, CSV, H T T P payloads, database strings and cross-service Jason; CurrentCulture (or the user's stored preference) only at the rendering edge.
Enforce it mechanically with CA1305 (specify IFormatProvider ) and CA1307 / CA1309 (specify / prefer ordinal StringComparison ) rather than by asking reviewers to remember.

Cross-Q²: Give an example where a culture-sensitive comparison is a security bug.-- think --

A: The Turkish-I problem, documented by Microsoft Learn. tr-TR has a dotted capital İ and a dotless lowercase ı, so i does not uppercase to I.
A guard written as path.StartsWith("FILE:", ignore Case: true, culture) returns true on an English system and false on a Turkish one, and Learn spells out the consequence, on Turkish systems someone could get past a block on FILE: URIs.
Any case-insensitive check on a scheme, header, extension, role or flag must be OrdinalIgnoreCase.
Related: dot NET 5 switched Windows globalization from NLS to ICU, and the documented example "Hello\r\nworld!".IndexOf("\n") returned 6 on dot NET Core 3.1, -1 on dot NET 5, and 6 again on dot NET 6+, three answers for one line across three runtimes, all avoided by passing StringComparison.Ordinal.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

Statement versus expression: statement does, expression computes; switch has both forms.
var: implicit static typing, type locked at compile time, not dynamic.
Primitives: 15 types; int = System.Int32; suffix L / U / m / f picks literal type.
Definite assignment: locals must be written before read; fields default to 0 / null / false.
string immutable: every Replace / Trim / Substring allocates, use StringBuilder in loops.
== on strings: value-equal (overloaded); on most reference types it's reference-equal.
Parameter modifiers: ref (in or out), out (must assign), in (readonly ref), params (variadic).
Null operators: ?. short-circuits, ?? coalesces, ??= assigns-if-null,! is compile-only.
Integer overflow silent: wrap in checked { } or set true</.
Raw strings """: literal everything; verbatim @"" only escapes "" to ".
Implicit not equal to lossless: int to float, long to double keep magnitude, drop precision.
byte + byte is int; byte += byte compiles because op= inserts the cast back (and truncates).
Cast truncates, Convert rounds half-to-even: (int)3.5 == 3, Convert.ToInt32(3.5) == 4.
Parse or format: InvariantCulture for machines, CurrentCulture for humans, double.Parse("1.5") is 15 in de-DE.
Compare: == and IndexOf(char) ordinal; IndexOf(string), StartsWith, Compare linguistic.
Length counts UTF-16 code units: emoji are 2; Rune for scalars, StringInfo for what users see.
Closures: captured locals become fields of a heap display class; for shares one, foreach doesn't.
const is copied into callers; static readonly is read at run time. Same for optional-parameter defaults.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Silent int overflow in billing.

Problem: A billing service computes total Cents = price Cents * quantity and ships fine for years. After a B2B customer orders 50,000 of a $500 item, the invoice shows a negative total and the payment processor returns "amount invalid."

Diagnosis: price Cents is int (50000), quantity is int (50000), product is 2,500,000,000, exceeds int.MaxValue (2,147,483,647) by ~350M. The multiplication wraps silently to a negative int.
Senior tells: search the codebase for arithmetic on monetary fields with Grep for \\s[Qq]uantity or \\s[Pp]rice; check the project file for (almost certainly absent, it's false by default in Release). Reproduce locally with checked { var x = 50_000 * 50_000; }, OverflowException confirms.

Fix: Two layers. (1) Cast operands wide before multiplying: long total = (long)price Cents * quantity;. (2) Add true to the project file so future violations throw instead of wrapping.
(3) Long-term, use decimal for monetary values; it can't overflow under realistic magnitudes and avoids floating-point errors.

Why it works: C sharp integer ops are silent-wrap by default for performance, the checked context (or project flag) inserts overflow-detection instructions. Casting one operand to long widens the operation so the multiplication occurs in 64-bit space.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

var x = 0; is implicit static typing, the compiler infers int and locks it at compile time; x = "hello" is a compile error and IntelliSense works fully.
dynamic x = 0; defers all type-checking to the DLR (Dynamic Language Runtime); x = "hello"; x.NotARealMethod(); compiles and only fails at runtime with RuntimeBinderException. var has zero runtime cost, identical I L to the explicit type.
dynamic turns each member access into a call site that must bind at run time, allocating and caching a binder and dispatching through a delegate rather than a direct call.

Strings are immutable; s += "x" allocates a new string and copies the old contents every iteration, O(n²) total.
Alternatives: (1) StringBuilder for unknown-length builds (amortized O(n)); (2) string.Create(length, state, span goes to.) for known-length hot paths (single allocation, no intermediate char[] );
(3) interpolated string handlers (C sharp 10+) which ILogger and Debug.Assert use, the formatter only allocates if the message is actually consumed.

in passes a struct by readonly reference, avoids the copy of a value type, but the parameter is immutable inside the method. To mutate without copying, change to ref.
To keep readonly intent but compute a derived value, return it: LargeStruct Compute(in LargeStruct s) goes to s with { Field = new Value };. The performance benefit of in (no copy) is preserved; mutation requires explicit ref or returning a new struct (cheap if it's small or you use with ).

In classic C sharp ( at most 9), the interpolation always allocates: string.Format is called, which boxes any value-type args into object[] and allocates the result string.
From C sharp 10, the compiler instead lowers an interpolated string to DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler, a ref struct that appends each component into a pooled buffer and produces one string at the end, avoiding the object[] and much of the boxing.
An A P I can go further by declaring its own handler parameter ( [InterpolatedStringHandlerArgument] ) and refusing to build the string at all: Debug.Assert does exactly this with AssertInterpolatedStringHandler (dot NET 6+), so a passing assert formats nothing.
Two important negatives: Console.WriteLine has no such handler, and neither does ILogger, interpolating into LogInformation formats eagerly and loses the message template that structured logging depends on. Use [LoggerMessage] there.

Choose decimal for any value humans count in base-10, money, percentages, tax rates, because double is base-2 and can't represent 0.1 exactly, leading to drift like 0.1 + 0.2 == 0.30000000000000004 and, worse, to totals that depend on the order of summation.
Cost, stated as mechanism: decimal is 128 bits (a 96-bit integer plus sign and a base-10 scale) against 64, so it costs cache and bandwidth; its arithmetic is software routines that must align scales rather than single vectorisable FPU instructions.
Large in a numeric inner loop, invisible next to a database round-trip, measure the specific loop rather than quoting a factor. For scientific or graphics or ML where rounding errors are part of the model and throughput matters, stick with double. Never use float / double for currency, ever.