-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

Generics are the spine of modern dot NET. List, Dictionary, Task, IEnumerable, Span, Action, every link operator, none of them work without generic type parameters.
Once you write more than trivial library code, you start needing constraints, variance annotations, and an understanding of how the C L R specializes generic types.
Senior interviews lean on this hard: "explain co or contravariance," "why can't IList substitute for IList," "what does where T: unmanaged enable."

C sharp 11 added static abstract in interfaces, which together with generic constraints unlocked generic math, write one numeric algorithm, run on int, double, decimal, custom types. C sharp 13 added allows ref struct, finally letting you use Span as a generic argument.
The generic surface in 2026 is more capable than it was even three years ago.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Generic types and methods.

A generic parameterizes a type or method by another type. The compiler stamps out a real type for each combination at compile-time (or, for value types, at jit time, see specialization below).

Naming convention: T, or TXxx for multiple (for example, TKey, TValue, TResult ). Avoid single non- T letters like K or V, TKey, TValue reads better and matches BCL conventions.

-- pause --
Type parameter constraints.

Without constraints, a T can be any type, including ones you don't want. Constraints let you require properties of T.

Syntax check. There is no where T: enum or where T: delegate. enum and delegate are keywords; the constraint takes a type, so you write where T: System.Enum and where T: System.Delegate (or System.MulticastDelegate ). Microsoft Learn's where (generic type constraint) page spells all three out.
Three base types are explicitly disallowed as base-class constraints: System.Object, System.Array, and System.ValueType.

Order matters in declaration:
The primary constraint, at most one: class / class? / struct / unmanaged, or a base class type (which is where System.Enum and System.Delegate land). notnull also occupies this slot.
Interfaces (any number) and other type parameters.
new().
allows ref struct (C sharp 13), always last.

Two combination rules the compiler enforces that people forget: unmanaged can't be combined with class or struct, and new() can't be combined with struct or unmanaged, every type satisfying those already has an accessible parameterless constructor, so new() would be redundant.

Real-world examples:

In the real world: a team introduced abstract class Repository where T: EntityBase, new() so the base class could hand out a blank instance for the "create" path.
Eighteen months later an aggregate needed a constructor argument, a tenant id that could not be defaulted, and the only way to satisfy new() was to add a parameterless constructor to the entity "just for the O R M".
That constructor then became reachable from application code, and a bug shipped where an aggregate was created with TenantId = Guid.Empty and saved. The new() constraint had quietly turned "the O R M needs to materialise this" into "anyone can construct this in an invalid state".
The replacement was a factory constraint, Repository(Func factory) in the base, or in modern C sharp, a static abstract T Create(TenantId) on an interface, both of which say what construction actually requires.
new() is not a general "T is constructible" constraint; it is specifically "T has a public parameterless constructor", and that is a design commitment to every caller, not just to you.

-- pause --
Generic constraints, the full catalog.

Each constraint changes what the compiler will let you do with T inside the method, and changes what the jit can assume when it specializes the code. Memorize the table; in interviews the cross-questions are about what each enables and what it costs.

where T: class, T is a reference type (nullable or not), T t = null; compiles; t is null works; ?. works, Shared ref-type body (one specialization for all reference T s).
where T: class?, T is a possibly-nullable reference type, Same as class but T is treated as nullable for NRT analysis, Identical specialization to class.
where T: struct, T is a non-nullable value type, Boxing-free interface calls (constrained call); T? means Nullable, Per- T jit specialization, distinct machine code per concrete value type.
where T: new(), T has a public parameterless constructor, new T() compiles inside the method, Roslyn emits call Activator.CreateInstance(), not a direct newobj.
The runtime special-cases the generic overload, for a value-type T it degenerates to zero-init; for a reference type it resolves and caches the default constructor. Measure before assuming it matches a direct new.
where T: SomeBaseClass, T derives from SomeBaseClass, Use SomeBaseClass 's public or protected members on T, No code-gen change; pure compile-time check.
where T: ISomeInterface, T implements the interface, Call interface methods on T directly, non-boxing for value types via constrained call I L, Big perf win for struct generics: T.MethodOnInterface() doesn't box.
where T: notnull, T is a non-nullable type (value or reference), T? is permitted in signatures; null literal is rejected for T, No code-gen change; warning surface only.
where T: unmanaged, T is a value type containing only blittable primitives (recursive), sizeof(T), stackalloc T[n], raw pointer ops, Span over native memory, Same jit specialization as struct, but the constraint is stricter, no references inside T.
where T: System.Enum (C sharp 7.3), T is an enum type, Pass T where System.Enum is expected; write strongly-typed enum helpers instead of leaning on the Array -returning Enum.GetValues(Type), It is a base-class constraint, so it takes the base-class slot.
Enums are value types, so per- T specialization still applies.
where T: System.Delegate / System.MulticastDelegate (C sharp 7.3), T is a delegate type, Delegate.Combine(t1, t2), t.GetInvocationList(), Also a base-class constraint; no code-gen change. Rare outside event or messaging infrastructure.
where T: U, T derives from / implements another type parameter U, Use U 's contract on T; assign T to a U variable, No code-gen change.
where T: allows ref struct (C sharp 13), Anti-constraint: T may be a ref struct ( Span, ReadOnlySpan,. ).
It widens the accepted set rather than narrowing it, T is allowed as a generic argument even though it can't be boxed, T now carries every ref-struct restriction: no boxing, no static fields of type T, no T[], and T can only be passed to another generic whose parameter also says allows ref struct.

A constraint you almost certainly mis-remember: Enum.Parse is not constrained to System.Enum. Its signature is public static TEnum Parse(string value) where TEnum: struct.
The generic overload shipped in dot NET Core 2.0, before C sharp 7.3 made System.Enum usable as a constraint, and tightening a constraint on a shipped A P I is a breaking change, so it stayed as it was.
The upshot: Enum.Parse("5") compiles cleanly and throws ArgumentException at runtime, the docs list " TEnum is not an Enum type" as a thrown exception, which is the tell that the check is a runtime one.
If you are writing your own enum helper, where T: struct, System.Enum gives you the compile-time check the BCL couldn't take.

Combining multiple constraints on one type parameter, order matters and is checked by the compiler:

The allows ref struct clause cannot be combined with class or class?, and cannot appear on a T that is also constrained where T: U when U is a known reference type, in both cases the constraint and the anti-constraint contradict each other.

Per-parameter where clauses, each type parameter gets its own where:

Why where T: ISomeInterface is the secret performance unlock for struct generics:

This is the mechanical difference between List.Sort() and ArrayList.Sort(). ArrayList stores object, so every element is already a boxed int on the heap and every comparison chases a pointer to it. List stores int inline in an int[] and the constrained call reaches Int32.CompareTo(int) directly.
Fewer allocations, better locality, no interface dispatch, state it that way rather than as a multiplier, because the actual ratio depends entirely on element count and comparison cost.

In the real world: a pricing service had a Money readonly struct and a generic SortDescending(T[] items) helper written years earlier as where T: IComparable, the non-generic IComparable, because that is what the original author had used on the class version. It compiled and it sorted correctly.
Under load the service showed allocation churn that a memory profiler traced to the sort: every a.CompareTo(b) on the non-generic interface boxed the Money receiver, so a single sort of a few thousand line items produced tens of thousands of short-lived heap objects and pushed gen-0 collections up.
The fix was a one-word change, where T: IComparable, after which the compiler emitted a constrained. prefix and the boxes disappeared. Nothing about the algorithm changed.
The lesson is that on value-type generics the generic interface constraint is not a stylistic preference over the non-generic one; it is the thing that decides whether the call boxes, and the compiler will not warn you either way.

-- pause --
Variance, covariance and contravariance.

For most types, Foo is not assignable to Foo. They're distinct, unrelated types, even though Dog derives from Animal. This is invariance and is the safe default.

But for some types, notably read-only sequences and consumer-of-T delegates, the safe substitution does work. C sharp expresses this with out (covariance) and in (contravariance) on interface and delegate type parameters.

Covariance, out T ("producer of T"). IEnumerable can substitute for IEnumerable because every Dog is also an Animal, and IEnumerable only produces T (via GetEnumerator ).

Contravariance, in T ("consumer of T"). Action can substitute for Action because anything that handles an Animal can certainly handle a Dog.

Invariance, neither in nor out. Default for any T that's both produced and consumed. IList is invariant: it both Add(T) (consumes) and T this[int] (produces). Allowing covariance on IList to IList would let you .Add(new Cat()) to a list that only stores Dogs, breaking type safety.

Memorize:
out T to covariant to producer position only (returns, get-only).
in T to contravariant to consumer position only (parameters, set-only).
(no annotation) to invariant to both positions allowed.

Where you see variance in the BCL:
IEnumerable, covariant (only produces T ).
IComparer, contravariant (only consumes T ).
Func, T is consumed, TResult is produced.
Action, contravariant (only consumes).
IList, Dictionary, ICollection, invariant.

Arrays, the historical exception: Dog[] is covariant to Animal[] for legacy reasons (Java compatibility). This is unsafe: Animal[] arr = new Dog[3]; arr[0] = new Cat(); compiles but throws ArrayTypeMismatchException at runtime.
Avoid relying on array covariance; use IEnumerable or IReadOnlyList instead.

In the real world: an internal library exposed IList GetEvents() because the implementation happened to have a List handy and returning the concrete-ish interface felt convenient.
Two consumers later, a caller with a List (a subtype) could not pass it into a helper typed IList, and rather than change the signature the developer wrote .Cast().ToList(), a full copy on a hot admin page, executed per request.
The fix was to change the parameter type to IReadOnlyList, which is declared IReadOnlyList and therefore accepts List with no conversion at all. The habit worth taking away: choose the parameter type by what the method actually does, not by what the caller happens to hold.
A method that only reads should say IEnumerable or IReadOnlyList, and it gets covariance for free; a method that says IList is asserting it might mutate, and invariance is the price of that assertion.

In the real world: a scoring engine held rules in a Rule[] field and, for a "run every rule" loop, passed it as object[] into a generic-looking dispatcher that wrote results back into the same array. It worked in every test.
In production, one tenant's configuration produced a ScoringRule[] (a subtype array) for the same field, and the dispatcher's write of a plain Rule into slot 0 threw ArrayTypeMismatchException, from a line that had not changed in two years, for one tenant, at 3am.
Array covariance means the static type of an array variable tells you nothing about what the runtime will accept on a store; every reference-type array store carries a check against the array's real element type.
The rewrite replaced the write-back with Span over a freshly allocated buffer, Span is invariant and has no such check, and the class of bug went away rather than the instance of it.

-- pause --
Covariance and contravariance, beyond interfaces.

Variance is a property of the type parameter declaration site, wherever C sharp lets you put in or out. It applies to interfaces and delegates, and shows up implicitly for arrays. Class declarations are never variant. Knowing the four flavors cold is a senior-level requirement.

1. Delegate variance ( Func, Action, Predicate, custom delegates).

Func is covariant in its return; Action is contravariant in its parameter; Func is both. Read the direction off the position, not off intuition: a Func flows into a Func (the value produced widens), and an Action flows into an Action (the value consumed narrows).

Mnemonic, "in narrows on the way in, out widens on the way out":
A delegate that accepts Animal can stand in for one that needs to accept only Dog (caller narrows the input, safe).
A delegate that returns Dog can stand in for one that needs to return Animal (callee widens the output, safe).

The exception nobody expects: variance does not apply to delegate combination. Microsoft Learn's Covariance and Contravariance in Generics states it flatly: "Variance does not apply to delegate combination.
That is, given two delegates of types Action and Action, you cannot combine the second delegate with the first although the result would be type safe." Assignment is variant; Delegate.Combine (the += behind a multicast delegate or an event) requires exact type identity.

In the real world: an event-aggregator was typed Action per topic, and a cross-cutting audit handler was written once as Action on the reasoning that "it handles every event, and contravariance means it fits everywhere".
Subscribing it to a single topic worked, that is plain contravariant assignment. Registering it alongside the topic's own Action handler threw ArgumentException from Delegate.Combine the first time two handlers existed for one topic, which in staging was never and in production was immediately.
The audit handler had to be wrapped per topic ( e goes to audit(e), which creates a genuine Action ) instead of assigned.
Worth internalising because it is the one place the variance rules stop: the compiler's assignment conversion and the runtime's multicast combination use different rules, and += on an event is the second one.

In the real world: a SortedSet needed ordering by area and the team already had a ShapeAreaComparer: IComparer used elsewhere.
The first attempt wrote a second comparer for Circle, then a third for Square, and the three drifted, one of them treated null as largest instead of smallest, so one report ordered differently from the other two.
IComparer is contravariant, which means the single IComparer can be passed straight into new SortedSet(comparer); Microsoft Learn uses exactly this pair as its contravariance example. Deleting two comparers deleted the drift.
The general shape: when you find yourself writing near-duplicate IComparer / IEqualityComparer / Action implementations for a type and its subtypes, contravariance already gave you the one-implementation answer.

2. Generic type parameter variance rules, what in / out is legal on:

The compiler enforces variance positionally: an out T member can only have T in return-type position and out parameter position; an in T member can only have T in parameter position. This is what makes variance type-safe.

Subtle rule, out T as a generic argument to an out -position generic: the variance is "contagious" along chains:

The Roslyn message is "type parameter T must be invariantly valid on IConsumer." This catches the legitimate type-safety hole.

3. Why arrays are unsafely covariant, the runtime check.

Dog[] IS-A Animal[] for legacy reasons (Java 1.0 compatibility, dot NET 1.0 era when generics didn't exist). Reads are safe; writes are checked at runtime:

The cost, a store into a reference-type array carries a hidden runtime type check, because the static type of the array variable does not determine its real element type.
On T[] for value-type T there is nothing to check: value-type arrays are not covariant, so an int[] variable can only ever refer to an int[].
On T[] for reference-type T, the jit emits a check unless it can prove the element type exactly, which it can when the array was just new d locally, or when the static element type is sealed (nothing can derive from it, so no other array type could be assigned into that variable).

Workaround for performance-sensitive code, keep the array's declared element type equal to what you store, prefer sealed element types, or write through a Span, which is invariant by construction and therefore has no covariance check at all.
Don't rely on the jit eliding the check; confirm it in a profile.

4. Variance and nullable reference types.

Nullable annotations ride along on variance, and the compiler enforces them with warnings rather than errors, because NRT is an analysis layer and not part of the runtime type system.

The direction that warns is the one that would let a null escape into code that promised it wouldn't see one. The direction that's silent is the safe widening. At runtime neither conversion does anything, both are the same reference, so a!
suppression here genuinely does nothing except move the risk to whoever dereferences the element. Be explicit about nullability in variance-carrying A P Is; the annotation is the only signal a consumer gets.

-- pause --
Generic specialization on the C L R.

When the jit compiles a generic type or method, its behavior diverges based on whether T is a value type or a reference type.

Reference types share a single specialization. Code for List, List, and List is the same machine code at runtime, the jit generates one body that operates on object references. This minimizes memory usage but means each ref-type T pays a small indirection cost.
Value types each get their own specialization. List, List, List are distinct machine code bodies. This avoids boxing entirely (the value-type T is stored inline) and lets the jit inline operations on T. Big perf win for hot paths.

Microsoft Learn's Generics in the runtime puts it this way:
"Specialized generic types are created one time for each unique value type that is used as a parameter," whereas for reference types "the runtime reuses the previously created specialized version of the generic type. This is possible because all references are the same size."

This is why List avoids the boxing that ArrayList (or List ) forces, and it happens automatically, with no attribute or flag. The flip side: instantiating many distinct value-type generics increases code size, because each one is a separate body.

For more on jit mechanics, see dot NET Fundamentals, jit.

-- pause --
Generic specialization in the jit, deep dive.

The shallow rule "value types specialized, reference types shared" hides a lot of nuance that comes up in senior interviews. The full picture:

Reference-type sharing (a single body):

The shared body uses MethodTable lookups for any operations that need T's identity (for example, Equals, GetHashCode ). The MethodTable for T is accessed via a hidden parameter or via the object's own header, both add one indirection per call.

Value-type specialization (per concrete T):

Each value-type specialization can:
Inline T operations (no virtual dispatch).
Use exact sizeof(T) for Array.Copy, Span slicing, et cetera
Devirtualize interface calls via the constrained call I L prefix, IComparable.CompareTo resolves to a direct call to the struct's method.

Implications for performance:

Code size, One body for all (small total), One per concrete T (can balloon).
Per-call overhead, Indirection through MethodTable, Direct inlined operation.
Interface calls, Vtable (no devirtualization unless sealed), Constrained call to direct to potentially inlined.
Memory layout, Pointer-sized slot (8 bytes on x64), sizeof(T) inline (no boxing).
default(T), null (no init code), default(T) = zero-init memory.
Equality, EqualityComparer.Default (one lookup, cached), EqualityComparer.Default specialized for T.
Hot-path jit, Single body, PGO-shared, Per- T PGO data, better hot or cold splitting.

Code-size implication, A O T and trim sizes:

Native A O T ( PublishAot ) and ReadyToRun ahead-of-time compile each value-type specialization that's reachable from the entry point. A library that exposes Dictionary where TKey and TValue have 10 each leaf types each could see 100 distinct specializations compiled into the binary.
For mobile, IoT, or container-size-sensitive deployments, this matters.

Mitigation patterns:
Use object -typed inner storage and box at the boundary if T doesn't need to be hot.
Constrain to class to force the reference-type-shared path.
Profile with dotnet-trace and check IL_SIZE per specialization.

Devirtualization wins, the jit can often see "this T is sealed and has no overrides" and replace the constrained call with a static one.
With Dynamic PGO (Profile-Guided Optimization, on by default since dot NET 8), this can also happen based on the types actually observed at runtime, via a guarded check that falls back to the virtual call when the guess is wrong.

In the real world: a telemetry ingestion library was published as a NuGet package, exposed RingBuffer and BatchWriter, and was consumed by a Native-A O T-published sidecar that ran in a memory-constrained container.
Adding a handful of new metric value types to the calling application, each a small struct, grew the published binary noticeably, because every new value type meant new specializations of RingBuffer, BatchWriter, and every generic method they called transitively. Nobody had changed the library.
The team's fix was to keep the hot single-element path generic and give the batching internals an object[] backing store, which collapsed the batching half onto the shared reference-type body at the cost of boxing on a path that was already doing I O.
The trade the reader should be able to articulate under questioning: value-type generics buy you no boxing and inlined operations per instantiation, and pay for it in code size per instantiation, which is invisible on a server and very visible in A O T, mobile, and container-size budgets.

-- pause --
Generic type identity at runtime.

Each closed generic type is a distinct System.Type. The runtime does NOT consider List and List the same type, they have different MethodTable s, different vtables, and different metadata.

Reflection-time construction with MakeGenericType:

MakeGenericMethod for generic methods:

Where this matters in real code, D I containers, ORMs, serializers ( JsonSerializer ), source generators that emit code for closed types. Every time you see a framework "auto-discover" generic types, MakeGenericType is involved under the hood.

Cost, the first construction of a given closed type has to load metadata, build the runtime type, and jit any bodies that aren't already compiled. After that the runtime canonicalises constructed generics, so repeat calls return the same cached Type instance and are cheap.
The shape to describe in an interview is "expensive once, then a dictionary hit", don't quote a number you haven't measured on the machine in question. If a request path depends on it, pre-warm at startup so the cost lands before traffic does.

In the real world: a message dispatcher resolved handlers by building typeof(IHandler<>).MakeGenericType(message Type) on every incoming message and calling MakeGenericMethod on a Handle shim. Throughput was fine.
Then the service was republished with PublishAot for faster cold start in a serverless deployment, and it started throwing at runtime, but only for the message types that happened to be structs.
Native A O T compiles the specializations it can see statically; a value-type instantiation reached only through reflection has no code to run and none can be generated at runtime.
Reference-type messages kept working, because all reference instantiations share one body, which masked the problem in every test that used class-based messages. The signal the team had ignored was an IL3050 warning at publish time, which is exactly what it is for.
The dispatcher was rewritten to register a closed-over Func per handler at startup, no reflection on the hot path, and the A O T warning went away. See Generics under Native A O T and trimming.

-- pause --
Type inference, when it works and when it doesn't.

Generic method type inference works on argument types, the compiler matches each parameter type with each argument and solves the system of equations.

Inference rules, what the compiler can and can't do:

Identity(5), maps to, Argument type int constrains T.
Identity(), maps to, Explicit.
Default() (no args), maps to, Nothing to infer from.
Process(get Value: () goes to 5), maps to, Lambda return inferred as int.
Combine(5, "x") (where T: both ), maps to, Two different types, no unique T.
Convert(x) (where input is double), maps to, Explicit T overrides any inference.
new Box(5) (any C sharp version, including C sharp 14), maps to, C sharp has never inferred type arguments from constructor arguments.
Box b = new(5);, maps to, Not inference, target-typed new (C sharp 9). The target type supplies int.

Methods infer; constructors don't, still. This is a permanent asymmetry, not a version gap. List.Add(5) infers nothing (the type is already closed), but you must write new List(), never new List(5).
Inferring type arguments from constructor arguments has been a long-standing open request against the language and has not shipped. The workaround is a static factory method:

Two features are routinely mistaken for constructor inference. Neither is:

The distinction matters in an interview because "C sharp added it in 12" is a confident wrong answer, and the follow-up ("so what does var b = new(5); do?") exposes it immediately.

Method-versus-constructor inference asymmetry, the canonical interview gotcha:

This is why the BCL pairs so many generic types with a non-generic static class of the same name: Tuple beside Tuple, KeyValuePair beside KeyValuePair, ImmutableArray beside ImmutableArray.
Those classes exist so a method, Tuple.Create(1, "x"), KeyValuePair.Create(k, v), ImmutableArray.Create(1, 2, 3), can do the inferring the constructor can't. When you design a generic type whose constructor takes all its type arguments, ship the same pairing.

In the real world: a caching layer had TryGet(string key, out T value) and a call site object cached; if (cache.TryGet(key, out cached)), written that way because the surrounding method already had an object local.
T inferred as object, so the cache stored and compared boxed values, and, worse, the type check inside TryGet ( stored is T ) was stored is object, which is true for everything.
A Customer cached under a key that a later refactor reused for an Order came back as an Order typed object, and the InvalidCastException surfaced three frames away in the mapper.
Nothing about the generic method was wrong; inference had simply been fed the declared type of a local instead of the type the caller wanted.
Inference reads the static type of the argument, never the runtime type and never the target of the assignment, so an object -typed local anywhere near a generic call is a place to look when a generic behaves as though it lost its type.

Goo(x) versus Goo(x), when explicit matters:
Goo(x), compiler infers from x 's static type. If x: object and you want T set to int, inference picks T set to object.
Goo(x), explicit. The compiler then checks x is convertible to T set to int.

Inference and overload resolution, when multiple methods are eligible, inference happens per candidate. The compiler picks the one with the most specific match. If two candidates tie, it's an ambiguity error.

Inference for nullable reference types is best-effort:

The compiler propagates nullability annotations through inference but doesn't always pick the most useful one, annotate explicitly when it matters.

-- pause --
default(T) in generics and the default! pattern.

Getting "the default" without knowing T's category, default(T) returns the type-appropriate default: null for reference types, zero-initialized for value types.

The default literal (C sharp 7.1+), shorter form, target-typed:

The I L emitted by default(T):

For unconstrained T, the compiler emits initobj T, zero-init the memory slot. For where T: class, it emits ldnull. The cost is essentially free.

The default! null-forgiving pattern, when NRT is on and T could be a reference type, default(T) returns null, but the type may be annotated as non-nullable. Use default! to assert the compiler should treat the value as non-null:

Without the !, NRT warns "Cannot convert null literal to non-nullable reference type." With it, you're telling the compiler "trust me, I'll set it before reading."

When this is legitimate:
A field that's initialized in a non-ctor lifecycle (for example, D I [Inject], framework callback).
A test fixture whose SetUp populates state before any test runs.
A generic class where T might be a value type (and default(T) is genuinely valid).

When this is a bug, using default! to silence a warning instead of actually handling the null case. The runtime will throw NullReferenceException deep in some unrelated method if the assertion was wrong.

Alternative, EqualityComparer.Default.Equals(x, default):

This handles all cases uniformly, reference, value, nullable value, without writing if (typeof(T).IsValueType).

In the real world: a repository base class declared protected TEntity _current = default!; so that a TEntity property could be non-nullable without a constructor argument, on the understanding that LoadAsync always ran first.
A later maintainer added a second entry point that read _current for a "last touched" audit field without calling LoadAsync. The!
had told the compiler to stop asking, so nothing warned; the NullReferenceException appeared in the audit writer, several layers from the field that was actually null, and the first three engineers to look at it went hunting in the audit code. default!
is not a fix, it is a promise made to the compiler that the type system will never re-check. Use it only where the initialisation is genuinely enforced by something outside the constructor (a D I lifecycle hook, a test SetUp ), and where a T might legitimately be a value type.
Where the field is simply "set later", TEntity? plus an explicit null check at the read site is the honest signature, and it puts the failure at the line that made the wrong assumption.

-- pause --
Generic math interfaces (C sharp 11).

C sharp 11 added static abstract interface members. Combined with constraints, this enables generic math, algorithms that work on int, double, custom numeric types, anything implementing the right interface.

The BCL ships:
INumber, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, comparisons, et cetera Implemented by all built-in numeric types ( int, long, float, double, decimal, BigInteger,.).
IAdditionOperators, ISubtractionOperators, et cetera, finer-grained interfaces.
IComparable, IComparisonOperators, et cetera

This was previously impossible without massive overload sets or runtime trickery ( dynamic, codegen). Now it's a one-line constraint.

-- pause --
Generic math, the full surface.

INumber is the top of a deep hierarchy of interfaces. The BCL split arithmetic into fine-grained operator interfaces so you can constrain to exactly what you need:

The direction of this hierarchy is the thing interviewers probe, and it is easy to get backwards. INumberBase is INumber, not it; IBinaryInteger and IFloatingPoint are.
Note when you read the source that INumber 's own declaration lists only five interfaces, IComparable, IComparable, IComparisonOperators, IModulusOperators and INumberBase, and everything else arrives through INumberBase.
The A P I reference flattens that into one long declaration line, which is the set drawn below:

If you constrain to something near the bottom you get more operations and fewer accepted types; near the top, the reverse. That is the whole design.

Why split this way, minimizing what you require. A Sum only needs IAdditionOperators and a way to get T.Zero. Demanding the full INumber forces every implementer (including custom numeric types) to implement floating-point semantics they may not have:

static abstract member groundwork, the language feature that makes this possible. Interfaces can declare static abstract members, which must be implemented as static members on each type that implements the interface:

The where T: I self-referential pattern is the standard idiom. The interface declares it returns TSelf (for example, T.Zero returns T ), and the constraint pins T to its own interface implementation.
This is called the curiously recurring template pattern (CRTP) in C plus plus terms, and it's what makes T.Zero work as a static call on the type parameter.

Cross-link, see OOP, Static abstract members (C sharp 11) for the language-feature side; this section covers the generic-math consequences of that feature.

Performance, generic math rides on value-type specialization: Sum and Sum are separate jit'd bodies, each resolving + through a constrained. call to the concrete type's op_Addition, which for int is an ordinary machine add after inlining.
No interface dispatch and no boxing, which is the property that makes the abstraction affordable at all. The cost is the same code-size cost as any value-type generic: one body per numeric type you instantiate.
Don't quote a percentage against a hand-written loop, it depends on what else is in the loop, and it's exactly the kind of number an interviewer will ask you to defend.

In the real world: a billing library had Money, and a request came in to reuse the existing generic aggregation helpers ( Sum, Average, Median ) with it.
The obvious move was where T: INumber, so Money was made to implement it, which drags in division, modulus, IParsable, ISpanParsable, CreateChecked / CreateSaturating conversions and the full comparison surface.
Implementing Money % Money and Money / Money meaningfully is a question nobody on the team wanted to answer, so they were implemented as throw new NotSupportedException().
Predictably, a generic helper eventually called one, and a currency conversion crashed in production for a code path that had been "unreachable".
The rewrite constrained each helper to the minimum it actually used, Sum to IAdditionOperators plus IAdditiveIdentity, Median to IComparisonOperators, and Money dropped INumber entirely. The transferable rule: a constraint is a demand you make of every future implementer.
INumber is a large demand, and a type that has to throw to satisfy it is telling you the constraint is wrong, not that the type is deficient.

-- pause --
allows ref struct (C sharp 13).

Before C sharp 13, you could not use Span, ReadOnlySpan, or any ref struct as a generic type argument, a type parameter carries an implicit "this may live on the heap" assumption, and ref structs may not.
C sharp 13's allows ref struct is an anti-constraint: unlike every other where clause it widens the set of accepted types rather than narrowing it.
The C sharp 13 feature spec is explicit about this: "other syntax items limit the set of types that can fulfill a generic parameter while allows ref struct expands the set of types."

The price is that T inherits every ref-struct restriction. Per the spec, a type parameter bound by allows ref struct cannot be boxed, participates in ref-struct lifetime rules, "cannot be used in static fields, elements of an array, et cetera", and can be marked scoped:

Two consequences worth having ready:

The anti-constraint is not inherited. In class C where T: allows ref struct where S: T, S still cannot be a ref struct. You must repeat allows ref struct on every parameter that needs it.
Span> still does not work, and this is the question people reach for. Span does not declare allows ref struct on its own T, because some of its public surface ( Span(T[] array), the implicit conversion from T[] ) uses T as an array element, which a ref struct can never be.

Where you'll genuinely reach for it is abstracting over enumerators and buffer types, writing one ForEach that accepts both a List.Enumerator and a ref-struct span enumerator, instead of two near-identical methods.
Outside that, leave it off; adding it to a type parameter you don't need it on only removes capabilities from your own method body.

-- pause --
unmanaged and notnull constraints.

where T: unmanaged, T is a value type that contains only blittable types: primitives ( int, byte,.), enums, pointers, or other unmanaged structs. Crucially, no references. This unlocks low-level pointer/ Span operations.

where T: notnull, T is a non-nullable type. Either a value type, or a reference type with NRT enabled. Useful for dictionary keys, since null is a poor key.

Note the asymmetry that Microsoft Learn calls out explicitly: "Unlike other constraints, if a type argument violates the notnull constraint, the compiler generates a warning instead of an error", and only in a nullable enable context.
notnull documents intent and catches accidents; it does not enforce anything the runtime will honour.

In the real world: a serializer helper was written where T: unmanaged so it could do MemoryMarshal.AsBytes over the struct and write it straight to a socket, a legitimate use, and it worked for the six DTOs it started with.
A year later someone added a string CorrelationId field to one of those DTOs, the unmanaged constraint stopped being satisfied, and rather than reading what the constraint meant they changed it to where T: struct and left the MemoryMarshal call in place.
That compiles, AsBytes is itself declared where T: struct, and struct permits a value type containing references, so the build went green and the change shipped.
What it did not do is work: AsBytes guards at runtime with RuntimeHelpers.IsReferenceOrContainsReferences() and throws ArgumentException ("Cannot use type 'T'. Only value types without pointers or references are supported.") the first time that DTO is sent.
A compile-time error had been converted into a production exception on one code path, discovered by a customer rather than by CI. That is the real shape of the lesson: unmanaged versus struct is not a strictness preference.
unmanaged is the compile-time proof that "reinterpret this as bytes" is a meaningful operation, and downgrading it to struct deletes exactly that proof, the BCL then re-checks the same condition at runtime,
because reinterpreting a managed reference as bytes is never something it will quietly let you do.

-- pause --
Open versus closed generics.

A closed generic has all its type parameters specified: List, Dictionary. An open generic has unspecified parameters: List<>, Dictionary.

Open generics are visible mostly via reflection and D I registration:

Open generic registration is a major D I pattern in A S P dot NET Core, it lets you wire up generic abstractions once and resolve them for any closed type the consumer asks for.

In the real world: a service registered services.AddScoped(typeof(IRepository<>), typeof(EfRepository<>)) and, separately, a background hosted service (a singleton) that took IRepository in its constructor.
The container resolved it happily, open generic registration does not change lifetime validation's mind about anything, and the captive-dependency check only fires when the scope validation option is on.
The scoped DbContext inside that repository was therefore captured for the process lifetime: its change tracker grew all day, memory climbed, and stale entities were served after other instances had written newer rows. Two habits came out of it.
First, ValidateScopes and ValidateOnBuild are on in every environment, not just Development, so a captive dependency fails at startup rather than at 4pm. Second, long-lived services take IServiceScopeFactory and open a scope per unit of work.
Open generic registration is a convenience for wiring; it has nothing to say about lifetime, and conflating the two is one of the most common senior-level D I mistakes.

-- pause --
Variance is a reference conversion, value types never participate.

This is the single most common follow-up to "explain covariance", and the page you are reading would have left you without an answer. Microsoft Learn's Covariance and Contravariance in Generics states the rule in one line:

"Variance applies only to reference types; if you specify a value type for a variant type parameter, that type parameter is invariant for the resulting constructed type."

So:

Why the runtime cannot allow the second one. A variance conversion must be a no-op at the machine level: IEnumerable and IEnumerable are the same reference, pointing at the same object, and the assignment emits no instructions at all.
That works because a Dog reference and an Animal reference have identical representation, both are a pointer to the object. int and object do not: turning an int into an object means allocating a box and copying the value into it.
Since IEnumerable yields int s from an int[] with no boxes anywhere, there is no reference for a hypothetical IEnumerable view to hand back without allocating one per element, and the C L R's assignment-compatibility check has no mechanism to insert per-element allocations. It therefore refuses.

The same rule explains three things that look unrelated:

IEnumerable to IEnumerable, maps to, Reference conversion; identical representation.
IEnumerable to IEnumerable, maps to, Boxing conversion, not a reference conversion.
IEnumerable to IEnumerable, maps to, Numeric conversion; also not a reference conversion, and long isn't a base of int.
IEnumerable to IEnumerable, maps to, Nullable is a value type too.
Action to Action, maps to, Contravariance is equally restricted to reference types.
IEnumerable to IEnumerable, maps to, Interface implementation is a reference conversion.

The escape hatch when you actually need the widened sequence is Cast or OfType, and you should say out loud what they cost:

That is not variance. It is a new sequence with a per-element allocation, and if the caller enumerates it twice it boxes twice.

In the real world: a reporting endpoint had a helper string Describe(IEnumerable items) used for diagnostics. It was called from dozens of places with List and friends, all free.
One call site passed a List of row ids, hit the compile error, and the developer "fixed" it with .Cast() because that was the suggestion that made the red squiggle go away.
The endpoint ran on a page that could return a few hundred thousand ids, so the diagnostic string, built on every request, including the ones where diagnostics were disabled, boxed every id and pushed a visible step into gen-0 collections.
The fix was to make the helper generic ( Describe(IEnumerable items) ), which specializes over int and boxes nothing. The reasoning to carry: when a covariant assignment fails on a value type, the compiler is telling you a representation change is required.
Cast agrees to pay for it; making the method generic declines to.

-- pause --
Static members live per closed generic type.

Counter and Counter are different types, and the C sharp standard's §15.5.2 Static and instance fields is unambiguous about what that means: "A static field in a non-generic class identifies exactly one storage location.
No matter how many instances of a non-generic class are created, there is only ever one copy of a static field. Each distinct closed constructed type has its own set of static fields, regardless of the number of instances of the closed constructed type."

Two properties fall out of this, and both come up:

The static constructor runs once per closed type, not once per generic definition. Three closed types, three cctor executions, three independent sets of statics.
Code sharing does not imply state sharing. Counter and Counter execute the same jit'd machine code (see the next section), yet have entirely separate Count fields.
The shared body reaches its statics indirectly, through the per-instantiation generic dictionary, which is exactly why sharing code is possible without sharing data.

This is the mechanism behind a deliberately useful pattern and a common bug.

The pattern, per-type caches with no dictionary lookup and no lock:

Serializers and mappers use exactly this shape. It is faster than a ConcurrentDictionary because the "lookup" is resolved when the code is compiled for that instantiation.

The bug, the same mechanism, applied to state that was supposed to be global:

Analyzers flag this (ReSharper's Static field or auto-property in generic type, and CA1000 covers the neighbouring "don't declare static members on generic types" guidance) precisely because the reading is ambiguous at a glance.
If you want one shared value, put it on a non-generic base or a non-generic static class:

In the real world: a multi-tenant service had RateLimiter with private static readonly SemaphoreSlim Gate = new(max Concurrency), intended as a global concurrency cap of, say, 20 in-flight calls to a fragile downstream. It behaved for months while only two request types existed.
Then a release added eleven more request types, and the effective cap became 13 times 20, because each closed RateLimiter, RateLimiter and so on had its own semaphore.
The downstream fell over during the release window and the limiter was the last place anyone looked, since "the limiter is set to 20" was true of every individual instance. Nothing in the code changed to cause it; adding types changed the number of static fields in existence.
The rule to keep: a static field in a generic type is scoped to the closed type, so ask "is this per- T on purpose?" every time you write one, and move it to a non-generic holder if the answer is no.

-- pause --
Shared generics, __Canon, and the generic dictionary.

The earlier section says reference types "share a single specialization". Here is the actual machinery, which is what a deep interview is fishing for.

CoreCLR compiles one canonical body per generic definition covering all reference-type instantiations. The canonical instantiation is spelled System.__Canon, an internal type that stands in for "some reference type". List, List and List all execute the code compiled for List.
The runtime's own design document ( docs or design or coreclr or botr or shared-generics.md in dotnet or runtime) explains why this is safe: sharing "is currently only supported for instantiations over reference types because they all have the same size or properties or layout or et cetera"

The consequence is that the shared body cannot hard-code anything about T.
Per the same document, "the canonical code will not have any hard-coded versions of the type handle of List, but instead looks up the exact type handle either through a call to a runtime helper A P I, or by loading it up from the generic dictionary."

A generic dictionary is, per the design doc, "an array where the entries are instantiation-specific type handles, method handles, field handles, method entry points, et cetera" Slots are populated lazily:
the first N hold the instantiation's type arguments, the rest start NULL and are filled on first use.

What forces a dictionary lookup in shared code, the operations that need T 's real identity rather than just "a reference":

typeof(T).
new T() (via the new() constraint).
new T[n], and casts like (T)obj or obj is T.
reading or writing a static field of the generic type, the reason statics stay per-instantiation even under shared code.
calling another generic method with T as an argument.
default(T) comparisons that route through EqualityComparer.Default.

The runtime resolves these through helpers named in the doc, JIT_GenericHandleClass for type dictionaries and JIT_GenericHandleMethod for method dictionaries, on the slow path, then caches the answer in the dictionary slot so subsequent executions are an indirect load.

How to use this knowledge. Two practical readings:

The "small indirection cost" the reference-type table row mentions is this, a load from the dictionary, not a virtual call. It is cheap and it is per-operation-that-needs- T, not per-method-call.
Code in a shared body that never asks about T 's identity (just moving references around, which is most of List ) pays nothing.
Value-type instantiations have no dictionary for these purposes: T is baked in, so typeof(T) is a constant and new T[n] knows its element type at compile time. This is a second, less-quoted reason value-type generics are fast, alongside the absence of boxing.

Generic virtual methods are the exception to be careful about. A virtual method that is itself generic ( class C { public virtual void M(T x); } ) cannot be dispatched through a normal vtable slot, because the set of instantiations isn't known when the vtable is laid out.
The runtime resolves these through a lookup at the call site rather than a fixed slot. They are also the construct most likely to fail under Native A O T, since every reachable instantiation must be discovered statically.
Prefer a non-generic virtual method taking an already-closed type, or a generic method on a non-virtual class, when you have the choice.

-- pause --
The default comparer and the missing IEquatable constraint.

This section connects "which constraint did I put on TKey " to "why is my dictionary allocating", and it is one of the highest-yield things on this page.

Dictionary, HashSet, List.Contains, Array.IndexOf and most of link route equality through EqualityComparer.Default. Microsoft Learn documents precisely how that default is chosen:

"The Default property checks whether type T implements the System.IEquatable interface and, if so, returns an EqualityComparer that uses that implementation. Otherwise, it returns an EqualityComparer that uses the overrides of Object.Equals and Object.GetHashCode provided by T."

For a struct that does not implement IEquatable and does not override Equals / GetHashCode, that "otherwise" branch lands on System.ValueType 's implementations. Reading ValueType.cs in dotnet or runtime, those are not simple:

ValueType.Equals(object) first asks CanCompareBitsOrUseFastGetHashCode. If the struct's layout permits it, it does a raw byte comparison via SpanHelpers.SequenceEqual.
If not, which is the case once the struct contains a reference field, or a float / double (because -0.0 == 0.0 must hold and NaN != NaN ), it falls back to reflection: GetType().GetFields(.) and a per-field Equals call.
The object parameter means the argument is boxed to reach it, and Equals(object) on a struct boxes the receiver too when reached through the non-generic path.
ValueType.GetHashCode has an even sharper edge. Its slow path, per the source comment, is that "we look for the first non-static field and get its hashcode.
If the type has no non-static fields, we return the hashcode of the type." A struct whose first field is low-cardinality therefore produces a low-cardinality hash, and a Dictionary with a low-cardinality hash degrades toward a linear scan of a bucket chain.

So the difference between these two declarations is not stylistic:

The jit's part. RyuJIT treats EqualityComparer.Default as an intrinsic and can devirtualize, and then inline, the Equals call when T is a value type with a known IEquatable implementation.
That optimization has been in place since dot NET Core 2.1 and applies to existing code with no source changes, which is why it is worth adding the interface rather than hand-writing a comparer: you get the fast path and the jit's help.

Which means the constraint you want on a dictionary key is usually:

notnull says "null is not a key". IEquatable says "comparison is cheap and correct", and for struct keys it is the difference between the devirtualized path and the reflection path.
Note that this is a stronger requirement than Dictionary itself imposes (which is only notnull ), so use it on your own types where you control the callers, not as a blanket rule.

record struct gets this for free. A record struct synthesizes IEquatable, a field-wise Equals, and a GetHashCode combining all fields. If you are declaring a small key type today, readonly record struct OrderKey(Guid TenantId, int OrderNumber); is a one-liner that lands on the fast path.
A plain struct does not.

In the real world: a pricing cache was keyed on struct RateKey { public string Currency; public DateOnly Date; }, a plain struct with a reference field.
The endpoint slowed under load in a way that didn't match its query count, and a memory profile showed millions of RateKey boxes with nothing obviously allocating them.
They came from Dictionary lookups: with no IEquatable, EqualityComparer.Default fell to the ValueType path, the string field disqualified the bit-comparison fast path, and every probe boxed both operands and compared fields by reflection. The hash was equally poor.
Changing one line, readonly record struct RateKey(string Currency, DateOnly Date), removed the boxing, the reflection, and the hash collisions together.
The durable lesson is that a struct used as a dictionary key has an implicit contract with EqualityComparer.Default, and if you don't satisfy it explicitly the runtime satisfies it for you in the slowest way available, silently.

-- pause --
Constraints are not part of the signature.

Three related rules that trip people up, all following from one fact: constraints are metadata on the type parameter, not part of the method's signature.

1. You cannot overload on constraints.

Both methods are Handle(T). The constraint is invisible to the signature, so this is a duplicate member, not an ambiguity resolved at the call site, but a compile error at the declaration.
Options: rename one ( HandleRef / HandleValue ), take different parameter types, or dispatch inside a single method with a runtime check.

This also explains why where T: IFoo and where T: IBar cannot express "either". Constraints are conjunctive: every listed constraint must hold. There is no disjunction in the language.

2. Constraint violations are reported at the call site. Declaring Repo where T: EntityBase compiles fine on its own; the error appears wherever someone writes Repo. So a constraint you add to a library type is a source-breaking change for consumers, discovered by them rather than by you.
Adding a constraint is a breaking change; removing one is not.

3. Constraints are inherited, not restated, on overrides, and that creates the default constraint. When you override a generic virtual method, you don't repeat its constraints; the override inherits them. That is normally convenient, and occasionally ambiguous.
Consider a base type with two overloads of M that differ only in whether T is constrained to struct:

An override written as public override void M(T? item) { } binds to the first one, because with no constraint restated the compiler cannot tell which T? you meant. C sharp 9 added where T: default to say "the one with no struct / class constraint":

where T: default is legal only on a method that overrides a base method or is an explicit interface implementation. It is a disambiguator, not a constraint, it adds no requirement, it just names which inherited signature you meant.
It is also the kind of detail that signals you have actually read the language reference rather than absorbed generics by osmosis.

-- pause --
Generics under Native A O T and trimming.

dot NET 10 makes Native A O T a mainstream deployment option, and generics are where A O T and reflection collide. The mechanism is one you already know from two sections up.

Reference-type instantiations are fine. All of them share one body, so the compiler only needs to emit List once and every List works, including ones discovered by reflection at runtime.
Value-type instantiations must exist ahead of time. Each one is distinct machine code. If nothing statically reachable from the entry point mentions List, that code was never generated, and Native A O T has no jit to generate it on demand.

So this is safe under A O T:

and this throws at runtime:

The compiler tells you in advance. MakeGenericType and MakeGenericMethod are annotated [RequiresDynamicCode], which produces IL3050 ("Using member. which has 'RequiresDynamicCodeAttribute' can break functionality when A O T compiling") at publish time.
Treat IL3050 as an error, not noise, it is the only warning you get, and the failure it predicts is both intermittent and type-dependent, because reference-typed arguments will keep working and hide it.

What to do instead:

Register a closed delegate per type at startup ( Dictionary> built from explicit registrations) so the hot path is a dictionary hit, not reflection.
Use a source generator to emit the closed instantiations, this is precisely why System.Text.Json has a source-generated mode, and why the generated JsonSerializerContext is the A O T-safe entry point.
Where you must keep reflection, force the instantiations to exist by referencing them from statically reachable code, and verify with a real A O T publish rather than a debug run.
Test the A O T configuration in CI. A jit-mode test suite cannot fail this way, which is exactly why it reaches production.

Trimming has a parallel story: the trimmer removes what it can't see referenced, and reflection over generic types is invisible to it. [DynamicallyAccessedMembers] on the relevant parameters is how you tell the trimmer to keep members it would otherwise drop.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

Constraint cheat sheet, most common in real code:

Method-level inference:

When inference fails (rare), specify explicitly. Inference looks at argument types only, not return-type usage.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

Trying covariance on IList. Doesn't work, invariant. Refactor consumers to take IEnumerable or IReadOnlyList instead.
Forgetting where T: class for null comparisons. Without it, T t = null; doesn't compile (because T could be a non-nullable struct). With where T: class, you can compare to null.
Assuming Enum.Parse is constrained to System.Enum. It isn't, its constraint is where TEnum: struct, kept for compatibility. Enum.Parse("5") compiles and throws ArgumentException at runtime. If you want the compile-time check, write your own helper constrained where T: struct, System.Enum.
(And it is System.Enum, never where T: enum, that isn't valid syntax.)
Array covariance trap. Animal[] a = new Dog[3]; a[0] = new Cat(); compiles, throws at runtime ( ArrayTypeMismatchException ). Use IReadOnlyList or be explicit about target type.
where T: new() doesn't allow ctor parameters. Only the parameterless constructor is callable through this constraint. Use Activator.CreateInstance or a factory delegate for parameterized cases.
Generic method with multiple constraints in wrong order. The compiler will tell you, but the order is fixed: primary constraint ( class / class? / struct / unmanaged / notnull, or a base class type such as System.Enum ) to interfaces and other type parameters to new() to allows ref struct.
Capturing a generic type parameter in a closure that crosses thread boundaries. Combined with Task, this can produce unexpected boxing for value types if the lambda body needs to compare to default. Profile before assuming generics are zero-cost.
Generic specialization code-bloat. Every distinct value-type instantiation is a separate compiled body. On Native A O T that lands directly in the deployable, so a library used with many struct type arguments grows the binary in a way that server-side jit deployments never surface.
Measure your own publish output, the size depends entirely on how much generic code is reachable.
allows ref struct constraint introduced everywhere. It is an anti-constraint: adding it removes capabilities from your own method body (no boxing, no T[], no passing T to other generics). Apply it only where you actually need ref-struct type arguments.
Variance only helps interfaces and delegates. Class declarations cannot be variant, class Box is a compile error. If you need variance, design for an interface and have your class implement it.
Expecting variance to work on value types. IEnumerable does not convert to IEnumerable. Variance needs a reference conversion, and int to object is a boxing conversion. Cast() compiles but allocates a box per element, make the method generic instead.
A static field in a generic type that was meant to be global. static int Count inside Cache gives you one counter per closed type, not one overall. Move shared state to a non-generic holder class.
A struct dictionary key with no IEquatable. EqualityComparer.Default falls back to ValueType.Equals / GetHashCode, which boxes and, for structs containing references or floats, compares fields by reflection. Use readonly record struct, or implement IEquatable by hand.
MakeGenericType over a value type under Native A O T. Throws at runtime because the specialization was never compiled. Reference-type arguments keep working, which hides it in testing. Heed IL3050.
Trying to overload two generic methods that differ only in their constraints. Constraints aren't part of the signature, so it's a duplicate-member error at the declaration, not an ambiguity at the call site.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

Generics parameterize types or methods by type. Compiler emits one definition; the jit specializes per value-type T (separate machine code) and shares one body across reference-type T s.
Constraints ( where T:. ) are how you signal what T must support: class, struct, new(), base class, interfaces, notnull, unmanaged, System.Enum, System.Delegate, and allows ref struct (C sharp 13).
Constraints are metadata on the type parameter, not part of the signature, so you can't overload on them.
Variance: out T (covariance, producer), in T (contravariance, consumer), default invariant. Only on interfaces and delegates, never on classes, and only for reference type arguments: IEnumerable does not convert to IEnumerable.
Reference-type instantiations share one compiled body ( System.__Canon ) and reach T 's identity through a per-instantiation generic dictionary. That is why static fields stay separate per closed type even when the code is shared.
A struct used as a dictionary key needs IEquatable, otherwise EqualityComparer.Default lands on ValueType.Equals, which boxes and may compare by reflection. readonly record struct gives it to you.
IEnumerable is the canonical covariant interface; Action the canonical contravariant delegate.
Generic math (C sharp 11), write one numeric algorithm via where T: INumber; works for any numeric type.
Open generic registration in D I: services.AddScoped(typeof(IRepository<>), typeof(EfRepository<>));, lets one registration cover all closed types.
unmanaged unlocks low-level pointer/ Span work; notnull is the right constraint for dictionary keys.
Array covariance is unsafe legacy, Dog[] to Animal[] compiles but writes can throw ArrayTypeMismatchException. Prefer IReadOnlyList.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this section once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, Variance on IEnumerable versus List.

Q: Why is IEnumerable assignable to IEnumerable but List is not assignable to List ?-- think --

A: IEnumerable is declared covariant, T appears only in output positions (the Current property, the enumerator's return). Returning a Dog where an Animal is expected is always safe. List is invariant because T also appears in input positions: Add(T), this[int] = T.
Permitting List to List would let a caller .Add(new Cat()) through the wider reference, corrupting the dog-typed underlying storage.

Cross-Q: Could the framework retrofit IList to be covariant by changing Add(T) to Add(object) ?-- think --

A: No, it would break every existing IList implementer and consumer, and it would push the type check to runtime (loss of compile-time safety). The actual solution the BCL took is IReadOnlyList (C sharp 4 era): a separate interface that exposes only the read surface, so it's safely covariant.
Most modern code takes IReadOnlyList or IEnumerable for read-only parameters and gets covariance "for free."

Cross-Q²: Show me the I L difference between a covariant and invariant interface that demonstrates the type-safety guarantee.-- think --

A: In the metadata, the type parameter on IEnumerable is marked with +T (the out flag in GenericParamAttributes.Covariant ). IList has no such flag (defaults to invariant).
The C L R's type-equivalence checker uses this flag during assignment compatibility: covariant generics check substitutability per-parameter (Dog to and from Animal); invariant ones check exact-match identity. The flag is metadata, not behavior, there's no runtime "covariance check" cost.

-- pause --
Drill 2, The in T / out T modifiers.

Q: What do in and out mean on a generic type parameter, and where is each legal?-- think --

A: out T declares covariance, T may only appear in output positions (return types, get-only properties, out parameters). in T declares contravariance, T may only appear in input positions (parameters, set-only properties).
The compiler enforces this positionally at the interface or delegate declaration.

Cross-Q: Can you put both out and in modifiers in the same generic, for example, Func ?-- think --

A: Yes, that's exactly what Func is. Each type parameter has its own variance. T is contravariant (parameter), TResult is covariant (return). So Func is assignable to Func, accepting a narrower input (Dog) and returning a wider output (Animal) is the safe transformation.
That's two safe substitutions happening in one delegate.

Cross-Q²: Why can a class never be declared variant, for example, why is class Box illegal?-- think --

A: Classes hold state, and state can be written to (fields, properties with setters). Allowing Box to Box would let the consumer write a Cat into a Dog -storage field through the wider reference.
Variance is a property of interface contracts, where the compiler can verify T is used only in one direction. Classes don't have that guarantee structurally. Workaround: declare a variant interface and have the class implement it: class Box: IReader {. } with IReader.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Array covariance.

Q: Are arrays in C sharp covariant? Is that safe?-- think --

A: Yes, arrays are covariant, Dog[] IS-A Animal[]. No, it is not safe. Animal[] arr = new Dog[3]; arr[0] = new Cat(); compiles but throws ArrayTypeMismatchException at runtime.
Every reference-type array store incurs a hidden runtime type check, which is both unsafe (deferred from compile time) and slightly slow.

Cross-Q: Why did the dot NET designers ship this if it's unsafe?-- think --

A: It was inherited from Java 1.0 (dot NET 1.0 era, before generics existed). Without generics, there was no way to write a function that took "an array of any base-or-derived type" except via covariance.
Generics shipped in dot NET 2.0 (C sharp 2.0) and made the safe IList -style invariant collections the right pattern. By then, array covariance was load-bearing in too many codebases to remove.

Cross-Q²: What's the runtime cost on a tight loop writing to a string[] declared as object[] ?-- think --

A: Each arr[i] = "x" emits a stelem.ref I L instruction, and the jit compiles it into a write preceded by a type check against the array's actual element type, read from the array object's method table, not from the static type of the variable.
The jit can elide the check when it can prove the element type exactly (the array was new d locally, or its static element type is sealed ); for a genuine upcast it must always check.
Don't quote a figure for the overhead, it's a compare-and-branch per store, so whether it's measurable depends entirely on what else the loop is doing, and an interviewer who hears "10%" will ask where you measured it.
Mitigation: declare the array with its real element type, or write through a Span, which is invariant and has no covariance check at all.

-- pause --
Drill 4, where T: new().

Q: What does where T: new() constrain, and what does the compiler emit when you write new T() ?-- think --

A: It requires T to have a public, parameterless constructor. Roslyn does not emit a newobj, it emits call Activator.CreateInstance().
The runtime special-cases that generic overload: for a value-type T it collapses to zero-initialization, and for a reference type it resolves the default constructor once and caches it.
Note also that new() cannot be combined with struct or unmanaged, because every type satisfying those already has an accessible parameterless constructor.

Cross-Q: Is it as fast as a direct new SomeType(), and how would you avoid the difference if not?-- think --

A: Don't assert a figure, say the mechanism and then say you'd measure it. It goes through an activation path rather than a straight newobj, so it is not automatically inlined the way a direct constructor call is, and whether that shows up depends on how hot the path is.
If a benchmark says it matters, the standard escape is to pass a factory delegate, public T Build(Func factory) goes to factory();, because a lambda over a concrete constructor gives the jit something it can inline.
D I containers use exactly this shape: they compile a factory once and never call Activator on the resolution path.

Cross-Q²: Can I require a constructor with parameters? for example, where T: new(string) ?-- think --

A: No, the language only allows the parameterless new() constraint.
For parameterized construction, either (a) require a factory delegate, (b) require an interface with a static abstract Create method (C sharp 11+: where T: IConstructable with static abstract T Create(string) ), or (c) use Activator.CreateInstance(typeof(T), args) with reflection, slow and untyped.
The static-abstract approach is the modern idiomatic answer.

-- pause --
Drill 5, where T: struct versus where T: class, jit implications.

Q: How does the jit treat a generic method differently when T is constrained to struct versus class ?-- think --

A: where T: struct to the jit generates a separate body per concrete value type ( Method, Method, Method are distinct machine code). Each body uses inline storage for T, exact sizeof(T), and no boxing on interface calls (constrained call I L prefix).
where T: class to the jit generates one shared body for all reference-type Ts; T is treated as a pointer-sized object reference at the machine-code level.

Cross-Q: Which is faster in a hot loop, and by how much?-- think --

A: Answer the "which" and refuse the "how much", the multiplier is the trap. Value-type instantiations win on three named mechanisms: elements live inline instead of as separate heap objects (better locality, no allocation), interface calls go through constrained.
to a direct call that can then inline, and the jit knows sizeof(T) so bulk operations are exact. Reference-type instantiations pay an extra indirection wherever the shared body needs T 's identity.
How large the gap is depends on element size, loop body, and how much of the working set fits in cache, so the honest answer is "here's the mechanism, and I'd put it under BenchmarkDotNet before quoting a number." The cost on the other side is code size:
one compiled body per distinct value-type T, which is invisible on a jit server and directly visible in an A O T deployable.

Cross-Q²: If I write where T: struct, IComparable, what's special about the interface call inside the method?-- think --

A: The compiler emits a constrained. I L prefix on the call to IComparable.CompareTo. The jit then resolves the call directly to the struct's own CompareTo method, no boxing, no virtual dispatch.
This is one of the strongest reasons to add where T: ISomeInterface to value-type generic code: without it, calling the interface method requires boxing T to a heap allocation first. With it, the call is direct and often inlinable.

-- pause --
Drill 6, where T: unmanaged.

Q: What does where T: unmanaged enable that where T: struct doesn't?-- think --

A: unmanaged means T is a value type containing only blittable types recursively, no references anywhere in the layout. This unlocks sizeof(T), stackalloc T[n], raw pointer/ Span reinterpretation, and FFI patterns.
struct allows any value type, including KeyValuePair which has a reference field; that breaks pointer-based ops.

Cross-Q: When would you actually use it?-- think --

A: Three places: (1) Serialization, MemoryMarshal.AsBytes(MemoryMarshal.CreateReadOnlySpan(ref t, 1)) to view a struct as raw bytes for fast serialization. (2) Interop / P or Invoke, passing a struct to native code via pointer.
(3) Zero-allocation buffers, Span buf = stackalloc T[16]; for a typed buffer on the stack. Outside of perf-sensitive libraries (BCL, Kestrel, RavenDB, et cetera), most code never needs it.

Cross-Q²: Will unmanaged work on Span as a generic argument?-- think --

A: No, Span is a ref struct, not an unmanaged struct. Ref structs can't be heap-allocated, can't be boxed, and can't be used as generic arguments (pre-C sharp 13). C sharp 13 added allows ref struct for this case.
The two constraints are orthogonal: unmanaged is about blittable layout; allows ref struct is about heap-allocation discipline. You'd use them together if you wanted T to be a ref struct and containing only blittable fields, rare, but valid.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Generic specialization sharing.

Q: Do List and List share the same jit'd method bodies?-- think --

A: No. List is value-type specialized, gets its own distinct jit'd body with inline int storage. List participates in the reference-type shared body, one body covers List, List, List, all reference Ts. So List is its own machine code; List shares code with every other ref-typed list instantiation.

Cross-Q: What's the consequence for binary size with A O T?-- think --

A: Each value-type T adds one specialization. A binary with List, List, List, List, List,., List carries N+ method bodies. For native A O T ( PublishAot ), this directly grows the deployable. For mobile / IoT, this matters.
The mitigation: where perf isn't critical, force class constraints or use object -typed inner storage to share the reference-type body.

Cross-Q²: How does PGO (Profile-Guided Optimization) interact with generic specialization?-- think --

A: Dynamic PGO collects type feedback per call site during tier-0 execution and feeds it into the tier-1 recompile.
For shared reference-type bodies that's the big win:
the shared code can't statically know T, but PGO can observe that a given call site sees string almost every time and emit a guarded devirtualization, a type check, an inlined string.Equals on the hot path, and a fallback to the virtual call otherwise.
Value-type instantiations already have T baked in, so PGO's contribution there is the ordinary one (block layout, hot or cold splitting) rather than devirtualization.
Dynamic PGO has been on by default since dot NET 8; treat "and it got better in later versions" as something to say only if you can name the change.

-- pause --
Drill 8, typeof(List<>) versus typeof(List).

Q: What's the difference between typeof(List<>) and typeof(List) at runtime?-- think --

A: typeof(List<>) is the open generic type definition, a Type object representing the unconstructed template. typeof(List) is the closed constructed generic type, a distinct Type instance with int substituted. They are different Type objects: typeof(List<>) != typeof(List).
The open one has IsGenericTypeDefinition = true; the closed one has IsConstructedGenericType = true.

Cross-Q: When would you use the open form?-- think --

A: D I registration, services.AddScoped(typeof(IRepository<>), typeof(EfRepository<>)); registers an open generic; the container constructs the closed pair lazily when something asks for IRepository.
Also reflection-based code generation, source generators iterate over List<> and emit closed-form code per consumer type. Anywhere you need to "register the template" without committing to a specific T.

Cross-Q²: Can I get the open definition from a closed type at runtime, and vice versa?-- think --

A: Yes, bidirectional. typeof(List).GetGenericTypeDefinition() returns typeof(List<>). typeof(List<>).MakeGenericType(typeof(int)) returns typeof(List). Round-trip is exact: the runtime canonicalizes constructed generics, so typeof(List) == typeof(List<>).MakeGenericType(typeof(int)) is true.
This is how D I containers and serializers move between open and closed forms.

-- pause --
Drill 9, MakeGenericType.

Q: When would you use MakeGenericType ?-- think --

A: When you have a closed type only at runtime, typically from configuration, reflection, or a generic interface where the consumer's T is unknown at compile time.
Examples: D I containers resolving IRepository<> to EfRepository<> for the requested T; serializers building Dictionary from Jason shape; ORMs constructing query expressions over user-defined entity types.

Cross-Q: What's the perf cost?-- think --

A: First call loads metadata, builds the runtime type, and may jit bodies that don't exist yet. Subsequent calls hit the runtime's canonical-type cache and return the same Type instance, so it becomes a lookup. "Expensive once, then cached" is the shape; don't attach a number you haven't measured.
For hot paths, pre-warm at startup. And say the A O T caveat unprompted, it's the follow-up they're waiting for: under Native A O T, MakeGenericType with a value type argument can throw at runtime because that specialization was never compiled, and the publish-time warning for it is IL3050.

Cross-Q²: How is MakeGenericMethod different, and when do you need it?-- think --

A: MakeGenericMethod operates on MethodInfo (a generic method definition), not Type (a generic type definition). You use it when you have a generic method like T Process(T x) and need to invoke it with a T known only at runtime.
Pattern: method Info.MakeGenericMethod(typeof(string)).Invoke(instance, new[] { "hello" }). Same caching story as MakeGenericType, first call slow, rest fast. Common in expression-tree compilation and dynamic link.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Type inference failures.

Q: When does Goo(x) infer the wrong type?-- think --

A: When the argument's static type doesn't match the intended T. The compiler infers T from each argument's compile-time type, not its runtime type. So Goo(x) where x is typed object (but actually holds an int ) infers T = object, not T = int.
The runtime then treats T as object, with all the boxing or no-specialization consequences.

Cross-Q: Show me a concrete case.-- think --

A: object o = 5; var result = Echo(o);, T is inferred as object, result is object, and inside the generic method any T operations treat the value as a boxed int. The fix: Echo((int)o), explicit type argument plus unbox. Even cleaner: avoid object -typed locals and keep int typed end-to-end.

Cross-Q²: Why doesn't inference look at the target variable's type? int x = Echo(o); could constrain T = int.-- think --

A: C sharp inference is argument-driven, not return-type-driven. The compiler solves the type-parameter equations from the arguments alone, then checks the result is assignable to the target.
Some languages (Haskell, F sharp) do full bi-directional inference; C sharp does not, because it would complicate overload resolution and produce more ambiguous-call errors. The escape hatch is explicit type arguments.
C sharp 12 did add limited target-typed inference for new() and collection expressions, but not for arbitrary generic method calls.

-- pause --
Drill 11, Generic method versus generic class.

Q: When would you write a generic method versus a generic class?-- think --

A: Generic class, when you need to hold typed state across multiple calls: List, Cache, Repository. The T is part of the type's identity. Generic method, when one operation needs to work for many types but the type doesn't persist: IEnumerable.Where, Equals, Max.
The T lives only for the method invocation.

Cross-Q: What if I want both, a class with a generic method?-- think --

A: Totally legal: public class Cache { public T Convert(TKey k) where T:. { } }. The class is generic in TKey, TValue; the method introduces its own T independent of those. Common pattern in serializers: JsonSerializer.Deserialize(json) is a generic method on a non-generic class.
Use this when the method's type doesn't need to be remembered by the holder.

Cross-Q²: Can a generic method's T shadow the enclosing class's T ?-- think --

A: Yes, and the compiler warns (CS0693): "type parameter 'T' has the same name as the type parameter from outer type." It compiles, but inside the method, T refers to the method's parameter, not the class's. Always rename one, convention is T for the most-local, TItem / TKey / TValue for the outer.
Otherwise refactoring sessions become hellish.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Multiple constraints.

Q: How do you write a constraint that requires T to implement two interfaces and have a parameterless constructor?-- think --

A: where T: IFoo, IBar, new(). The order is enforced by the compiler: primary constraint ( class / struct / notnull /et cetera) first to base class to interfaces to new() to allows ref struct (C sharp 13). Multiple interfaces are comma-separated.
There's no AND or OR, all listed constraints must hold.

Cross-Q: Can I express "T implements IFoo OR IBar "?-- think --

A: No, generic constraints are conjunctive only (all must hold). To express "either," you either (a) introduce a common base interface that both inherit, (b) split into two overloads with separate constraints, or (c) use a discriminated union at the call site via pattern matching.
C sharp has discussed "constraint disjunction" in proposals, but it's not landed.

Cross-Q²: What if IFoo and IBar both have a method Save() with different return types?-- think --

A: The compiler picks the one explicitly called: ((IFoo)t).Save() versus ((IBar)t).Save(). If you write t.Save() directly and the signatures conflict (different return types), it's a compile error, ambiguous call. The resolution is explicit interface cast.
Same principle as default-interface-method diamond ambiguity (CS8705) from the OOP chapter.

-- pause --
Drill 13, default(T) for unconstrained T.

Q: For an unconstrained T, what does the compiler emit for default(T) ?-- think --

A: The initobj T I L instruction, zero-initializes the memory slot reserved for T. For reference-type T at runtime, this writes null (8 bytes of zero). For value-type T, it writes sizeof(T) bytes of zero. Both cases are essentially free, the jit often elides them when the slot is already zeroed.

Cross-Q: How does this change if I add where T: class ?-- think --

A: The compiler emits ldnull instead of initobj, same result, but encoded as a single I L instruction. Both compile to identical machine code on modern JITs. The difference is the language type of default(T): with class, it's T?
(nullable); without, it's T (the value of default is the "default for that kind"). The NRT system uses this difference to suppress null warnings when appropriate.

Cross-Q²: I have public T Find(int id) goes to found? value: default; with NRT enabled, and the compiler warns. Why, and how do I fix it?-- think --

A: The warning is "possible null return for a non-nullable type", because T could be a reference type (where default(T) is null ) but is annotated as non-nullable. Three fixes: (1) annotate the return as T?
, most honest, signals "may be missing." (2) Add where T: notnull and throw on miss, eliminates the null-return path. (3) Use default!
to suppress, the null-forgiving operator says "trust me, callers will check." Option (1) is best; (3) is the right fallback when the framework forces a specific signature.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Generic math: Sum.

Q: Write a Sum(IEnumerable xs) that works on int, double, decimal, and custom numeric types.-- think --

A:
csharp.
public static T Sum(IEnumerable xs) where T: INumber.
{.
T total = T.Zero;
foreach (var x in xs) total += x;
return total;
}.

The where T: INumber constraint requires T implements the master numeric interface (which all BCL numeric types do, and which custom types can implement). T.Zero is a static abstract member, callable on the type parameter. The += resolves to IAdditionOperators.operator +, which INumber requires.

Cross-Q: Why not just require IAdditionOperators since you only use + ?-- think --

A: That's actually the tighter version: where T: IAdditionOperators, IAdditiveIdentity. It allows custom numeric types that don't implement full INumber (for example, a Money type with only +/- semantics, no division or comparison) to use Sum. Best practice: constrain to the minimum needed.
The looser constraint is more useful at the A P I boundary; the tighter one is correct.

Cross-Q²: How is this compiled, does each Sum, Sum, et cetera get its own machine code?-- think --

A: Yes, generic math rides entirely on value-type specialization. Sum and Sum are distinct jit'd bodies. The += resolves through a constrained. call to the concrete type's op_Addition, which for the primitives is a single machine instruction once inlined, no virtual dispatch, no boxing.
That's the point: without static abstract members the alternative was an interface call per operation, which would have made the abstraction unusable. The cost is one compiled body per numeric type instantiated.
Resist quoting a percentage against a hand-written loop; the interviewer's next question is where you measured it.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Variance with delegates.

Q: Which way round does it go, does Func work where Func is expected, or the reverse? Walk me through the type-safety argument.-- think --

A: Func flows into Func, not the reverse. Func is covariant in TResult because the type parameter only ever appears in the return position.
A Func produces a Dog; the caller holding it as a Func expects an Animal back and receives a Dog, which is an ordinary safe upcast, every value the delegate can produce satisfies what the caller was promised.
The reverse fails: a caller holding a Func will assign the result to a Dog variable, and a Func could hand back a Cat. The general test to say out loud: substitution is safe when every value flowing out of the substituted type is still acceptable to the consumer.

Cross-Q: What about Action versus Action, which flows into which, and why?-- think --

A: Action is contravariant in T. An Action handles any Animal as input. It can substitute for Action because anything that can handle any Animal can certainly handle a Dog, a Dog is an Animal. So Action flows into Action (less specific to more specific, in the parameter direction).
The opposite of Func 's direction. Mnemonic: covariant returns are "wider OK"; contravariant parameters are "wider OK on the way in."

Cross-Q²: Custom delegate types can be variant too, how do you declare a contravariant delegate?-- think --

A:
csharp.
public delegate void Handler(T item);
public delegate TResult Transform(T item);

Same in / out modifiers as interfaces. The compiler enforces the positional constraint: in T must appear only in input positions; out T only in output. The BCL's Func, Action<>, Predicate<> are all declared this way.
Custom delegates are rare in modern code ( Func and Action cover almost every case), but the variance machinery is the same.

-- pause --
Drill 16, Boxing in generic methods.

Q: Does where T: IFoo eliminate boxing on a value-type T ?-- think --

A: Yes, for the duration of the generic method. The compiler emits the constrained. I L prefix on calls to interface members on T. The jit then resolves the call directly to the struct's own method implementation, no box, no virtual dispatch.
Outside the generic method (for example, assigning T to an IFoo variable), the box happens as usual.

Cross-Q: What's the I L look like, and how does the jit handle it?-- think --

A:
il.
ldarga.s t // address of T parameter.
constrained. !!T // back to prefix.
callvirt IFoo.Method.

The constrained. prefix tells the jit: "if T is a value type, call the struct's method directly without boxing; if T is a reference type, box and dispatch normally." At jit-time, with T known concretely (value-type specialization), the prefix resolves to a static call.
Reference-type generics still take the boxing path (but only one box per call, and the jit often eliminates it via escape analysis).

Cross-Q²: I have List> and I call Contains(some Pair). Does it box?-- think --

A: Careful, this one depends on whether KeyValuePair implements IEquatable, and it does not.
EqualityComparer.Default checks for IEquatable first and, per Microsoft Learn, "otherwise. returns an EqualityComparer that uses the overrides of Object.Equals and Object.GetHashCode provided by T." KeyValuePair doesn't override them either, so the comparison lands on ValueType.Equals,
and because the struct contains a string reference it can't take the bit-comparison fast path, it compares fields by reflection, with boxing on the way in.
The element storage stays unboxed (the T[] holds the pairs inline), but the comparison does not.
This is the general senior point about generic collections: value-type elements stay unboxed through storage automatically, but staying unboxed through equality requires IEquatable, and you have to put it there yourself.

-- pause --
Drill 17, Variance and value types.

Q: IEnumerable converts to IEnumerable. Does IEnumerable convert to IEnumerable ?-- think --

A: No.
Microsoft Learn states the rule directly: "Variance applies only to reference types; if you specify a value type for a variant type parameter, that type parameter is invariant for the resulting constructed type." IEnumerable to IEnumerable is a compile error, even though int derives from object.

Cross-Q: Why does the runtime draw the line there? int really is an object.-- think --

A: Because a variance conversion has to be free. Assigning IEnumerable to IEnumerable emits no instructions at all, it's the same reference to the same object, and a Dog reference and an Animal reference are bit-identical in representation.
Getting from int to object is a boxing conversion: it allocates and copies.
An IEnumerable yields raw int s from inline storage, so an IEnumerable view of it would have to allocate a box per element as it enumerated, and the C L R's assignment-compatibility check has no way to inject per-element allocations into what is supposed to be a no-op cast.
Variance requires an identity-preserving or reference conversion; boxing is neither.

Cross-Q²: So how do I get the sequence I wanted, and what does it cost?-- think --

A: ints.Cast(), and say the cost in the same breath: it is a new lazy sequence that boxes one element at a time as you enumerate, and boxes again if you enumerate twice. It is not variance and it is not free.
The better answer in most real code is to make the consuming method generic, Describe(IEnumerable items), which specializes over int and allocates nothing. Reach for Cast only at a boundary you don't control.

-- pause --
Drill 18, Static state in generic types.

Q: class Counter { public static int Count; }. I do Counter.Count++ and Counter.Count++. What are the two values?-- think --

A: Both are 1.
The C sharp standard (§15.5.2) says that "each distinct closed constructed type has its own set of static fields, regardless of the number of instances of the closed constructed type", so Counter and Counter have separate Count fields, and separate static constructors that each run once.

Cross-Q: But Counter and Counter share the same jit'd machine code. How can they have different statics?-- think --

A: That's the good version of this question. The shared body is compiled for System.__Canon and contains no hard-coded reference to any instantiation's data.
Anything requiring the instantiation's identity, including the base address of its static fields, is fetched at runtime from that instantiation's generic dictionary, an array of type handles, method handles and field handles built per closed type.
So the code is one copy and the data is many; the dictionary is precisely the indirection that makes both true at once.

Cross-Q²: Give me a case where per-closed-type statics are the right design, and a case where they're a bug.-- think --

A: Right: a per-type metadata cache, static class Metadata { public static readonly PropertyInfo[] Properties = typeof(T).GetProperties(); }.
Access is a static field read with the runtime's type-initializer doing the locking, which beats a ConcurrentDictionary because the lookup is resolved when the instantiation is compiled. Serializers do this.
Bug: anything intended as a global, a connection counter, a rate-limiter semaphore, a circuit-breaker state, placed on a generic type. It silently becomes one per closed type, so adding a new T multiplies your "global" limit.
Fix by moving the state to a non-generic static holder that the generic type references.

-- pause --
Drill 19, Constraints and the method signature.

Q: Can I write void Handle(T x) where T: class and void Handle(T x) where T: struct as two overloads?-- think --

A: No, CS0111, duplicate member, reported at the declaration, not at any call site. Constraints are metadata attached to the type parameter; they are not part of the method's signature. Both declarations are Handle(T).
Same reason you can't say "T implements IFoo or IBar ", constraints are conjunctive, and there's no disjunction in the language.

Cross-Q: If constraints aren't part of the signature, when does a constraint violation get reported?-- think --

A: At the call site, Repo errors, not the declaration of Repo where T: EntityBase. Which has a versioning consequence worth stating: adding a constraint to a published generic type is a source-breaking change that your consumers discover, not you. Removing one is safe.
Same asymmetry as tightening a parameter type.

Cross-Q²: What is where T: default, and when do you need it?-- think --

A: C sharp 9, and it's a disambiguator rather than a constraint. Overrides don't restate constraints, they inherit them, which becomes ambiguous when a base type declares both void M(T? item) where T: struct (where T? means Nullable ) and void M(T? item) with no constraint (where T?
means "maybe-null T"). An override written without a where binds to the first. where T: default says "I mean the one with neither the struct nor the class constraint." It adds no requirement and is legal only on an override or an explicit interface implementation.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

Generic specialization: each value-type T gets its own jit'd code; reference types share one body.
out T: covariant producer ( IEnumerable ); only in output positions.
in T: contravariant consumer ( Action ); only in input positions.
Default invariant: List, IList, classes, no implicit upcast or downcast in T.
Constraint order: primary ( class / struct / unmanaged / notnull or a base class) to interfaces to new() to allows ref struct.
where T: unmanaged: enables sizeof(T), stackalloc T[n], pointer ops; excludes references. Not interchangeable with struct.
where T: System.Enum / System.Delegate, never where T: enum, which is not valid syntax.
where T: INumber (C sharp 11): generic math via static abstract operators. INumberBase is INumber; IBinaryInteger and IFloatingPoint are.
allows ref struct (C sharp 13): an anti-constraint, it widens what T may be, and narrows what your body may do with it.
D I open generics: AddScoped(typeof(IRepo<>), typeof(EfRepo<>)), one line for all closed types. Says nothing about lifetime.
Array covariance trap: Dog[] to Animal[] compiles, writes can throw ArrayTypeMismatchException.
Variance needs a reference conversion: IEnumerable ↛ IEnumerable; Cast() works but boxes per element.
Variance doesn't apply to delegate combination: += needs exact type identity even where assignment is variant.
Statics are per closed type: Counter.Count and Counter.Count are different fields despite one shared body.
__Canon: all reference instantiations share one compiled body; identity operations go through the generic dictionary.
Struct dictionary keys need IEquatable, or EqualityComparer.Default falls to ValueType.Equals (boxing, sometimes reflection).
Constraints aren't part of the signature: no overloading on them; violations surface at the call site; where T: default disambiguates overrides.
Native A O T: MakeGenericType / MakeGenericMethod over value types can throw at runtime, publish-time warning IL3050.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, IList can't flow into IList.

Problem: A library exposes void NameAll(IList animals). The caller has List dogs and writes NameAll(dogs);, compile error: "cannot convert List to IList." The dev "fixes" it with (IList)(object)dogs, runtime InvalidCastException.

Diagnosis: Read the interface declaration: IList has both inputs ( Add(T), this[int] = T ) and outputs ( this[int], IndexOf ). T appears in both positions, which is why the compiler defaults to invariant, implicit conversion in either direction would be unsafe.
Allowing IList to IList would let the callee Add(new Cat()) to a list typed Dog[], exactly the array-covariance hole.

Fix: If the method only reads animals, change the parameter to IEnumerable or IReadOnlyList, both are declared out T (covariant). IEnumerable flows into IEnumerable for free, no cast.

If mutation is required, the right pattern is to add or write through a non-generic-overload ( void Add(T item) where T: Animal ) or take a more specific input.

Why it works: Variance is a type-safety contract. out T permits implicit upcasts because covariant interfaces only produce T, assigning a Dog to an Animal reference is always safe.
Reading a Dog as an Animal is the canonical safe upcast; writing a Cat into a Dog collection is the canonical unsafe one.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Value types vary in size and layout, Dictionary stores a 4-byte key inline, Dictionary a 16-byte one, and the ldobj / stobj / cpblk work the generated code has to do needs the exact size, so no single body can serve both.
Reference types are uniformly pointer-sized and identical in layout regardless of what they point at,
which is exactly the reason the runtime's own shared-generics design document gives for sharing: instantiations over reference types "all have the same size or properties or layout or et cetera" One canonical body, compiled for System.__Canon, therefore serves every reference T,
and anything in it that needs T 's real identity ( typeof(T), new T[n], a static field, a cast) goes through that instantiation's generic dictionary.
Trade-off: value-type instantiations avoid boxing and indirection but multiply code size; reference-type instantiations are compact but pay a dictionary load wherever identity is needed.

Result needs TError covariant out (you only return errors, never accept) and TValue covariant out (same). Declare it as an interface: public interface IResult {. }. With DbError: Exception and User: object, IResult is implicitly assignable to IResult.
The class implementation Result: IResult itself can't be variant, only interfaces or delegates can, so callers should consume via the interface.

struct allows any value type, including those containing references (for example, KeyValuePair ). unmanaged is stricter, T must be a value type containing only blittable primitives recursively (no managed references).
unmanaged enables sizeof(T), stackalloc T[n], raw byte* pinning, and Span over native memory. Use unmanaged only when you need those, for example, for serialization to bytes, FFI, or zero-allocation buffers. Otherwise struct is broader and just as performant for normal generic use.

Two reasons. (1) Variance modifiers ( out, in ) are only allowed on interfaces and delegates, classes can never be declared variant. (2) Even on an interface, out T requires T to appear only in output positions; Value { get; set; } puts T in both get (output, OK) and set (input, not OK).
Fix options: (a) split into interface IReader { T Value { get; } } and interface IWriter { T Value { set; } }; (b) make the class implement IReader and add a non-generic write path. The compile error is the type system protecting you from a covariance hole.

This is open generic registration. The D I container will resolve any closed IValidator (for example, IValidator ) by constructing the matching closed FluentValidator. One line covers infinite closed types, ideal for cross-cutting interfaces like IRepository<>, IValidator<>, INotificationHandler<>.
Alternative is per-type registration ( AddScoped,.>() ), verbose, error-prone, but lets you swap a single specialization. Use open registration as the default; override per-type only when one specialization needs a different implementation.