-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

Delegates and lambdas are how C sharp expresses "code as a value", pass a function, return a function, store a function in a list. Every link operator, every Task.Run(.), every event handler, every middleware in A S P dot NET Core uses them.
The tricky parts are closure capture (especially the foreach rule) and expression trees (which let IQueryable translate code to sequel). Both are senior-interview staples.

Modern C sharp made these features even easier: target-typing for delegates (C sharp 10), static lambdas (C sharp 9, no captures), default lambda parameters (C sharp 12), and params collections in lambdas (C sharp 13). Worth knowing what's modern versus legacy.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
Delegates, type-safe method references.

A delegate is a type that represents a method signature. You can store a method reference in a delegate variable and invoke it later.

Internally, every delegate derives from MulticastDelegate (which derives from Delegate ), and an instance carries:
_target, surfaced by the public Target property as the object the method is called against, or null for a static method.
_methodPtr (plus _methodPtrAux ), the code address to call.
_invocationList / _invocationCount, null and 0 for a single-target delegate. For a multicast delegate, _invocationList is an object[] of the individual delegates and _invocationCount is how many slots are live.

That last point is worth getting right, because it is a common wrong answer. The invocation list is an array, not a linked list, there is no next pointer chaining one delegate to the next.
You can see this for yourself with reflection over typeof(MulticastDelegate).GetFields(BindingFlags.Instance | BindingFlags.NonPublic), which prints six fields:
_invocationList and _invocationCount (declared by MulticastDelegate ), plus _target, _methodBase, _methodPtr and _methodPtrAux inherited from Delegate, they show up because they are internal rather than private, so reflection on the derived type still sees them.
No next field anywhere in that list.

Combining two single-target delegates allocates an array sized exactly to fit ( new object[2] ). Growth from there is by doubling once the array is full, so a third handler moves the list into a four-slot array with _invocationCount == 3 and a fourth reuses the spare slot.
_invocationCount, not Length, is the number of live entries.

This layout explains the dispatch cost. Single-target invocation reads _methodPtr and makes one indirect call, not a virtual-table lookup, because the target is stored in the object rather than resolved through a type. Multicast invocation walks the array and calls each entry in turn.
The real cost of a delegate call is usually not the indirection itself but the fact that the jit cannot inline through it unless it can prove which target it holds; a two-line method that would have been inlined at a direct call site stays a real call behind a delegate.

In the real world: an ingestion service modelled its row pipeline as List>, trim, normalise, geocode, validate, enrich, project, and it was genuinely the clearest code in the repo. Under load, profiling put a surprising share of C P U in the pipeline itself rather than in any stage.
Nothing was slow; there were six un-inlinable indirect calls per row, and each stage's body was two or three lines that the jit would have folded away at a direct call site.
The team kept the composable pipeline for the long tail of formats and hand-wrote a single method for the two formats that carried nearly all the volume.
That is the honest shape of the trade: delegates cost you inlining, which matters exactly when the delegated work is small and the call count is large, and is irrelevant everywhere else.

-- pause --
Action, Func, Predicate, the BCL trio.

You almost never declare a custom delegate type anymore, the BCL ships generic delegate types that cover every signature.

Action, void(), No args, no return.
Action, void(T), One arg, no return.
Action, void(T1, T2), .up to 16 args.
Func, TResult(), No args, returns.
Func, TResult(T), One arg, returns.
Func, TResult(T1, T2), .up to 16 args.
Predicate, bool(T), One arg, bool return, used by List.Find, Array.Find, et cetera

Predicate is older and largely superseded by Func (which link uses uniformly). They describe the same shape, but they are distinct types with no conversion between them, typeof(Func).IsAssignableFrom(typeof(Predicate)) is false.
You can bridge them only by re-wrapping ( new Func(my Predicate.Invoke) ), which allocates a second delegate whose target is the first.

In the real world: a rules engine was built around Predicate because the author had learned it from List.Find. It worked fine for a year.
The friction appeared when the same rules had to feed a link query, orders.Where(rule) doesn't compile, because Where wants Func, so a ToFunc() helper appeared, then a ToPredicate() helper for the other direction,
then a rule that had been wrapped twice and could no longer be compared for equality against the original.
The fix was a two-hour find-and-replace to Func throughout. The lesson is small but general: pick the type the rest of the ecosystem speaks, even when a more descriptive one exists, because every boundary you create is a place where someone writes an adapter.

-- pause --
Func versus Action versus custom delegates, when each.

The BCL covers >99% of delegate needs. But "should I ever declare my own delegate type?" is a real interview question. Here's the answer matrix.

Returns a value, Func, One line, no new type to introduce.
Returns void, Action, Same.
Bool predicate over one item, Func (preferred) or Predicate (legacy), link uses Func; matches everywhere.
Parameter names matter for tooling / documentation, Custom delegate, Func is anonymous; delegate int Reducer(int acc, int item) self-documents.
Variance required on out / in for your type parameter, Custom delegate, You can declare your own in and out (the BCL trio already declares them for the common cases).
ref / out / in parameters, Custom delegate, Func<> / Action<> cannot express ref-kinds; declare delegate bool TryParser(string s, out T value);.
params array or default parameter values in delegate signature, Custom delegate, Func<> / Action<> parameters are positional with no defaults.
Signature appears in many public A P Is and you want a strong domain name, Custom delegate, delegate Money Discount(Order o); reads better than Func everywhere.

Rule of thumb: start with Func<> / Action<>. Promote to a custom delegate when you find yourself writing the same Func in five places, or when you need ref / out, or when parameter names would help readers ( Func is genuinely confusing for (acc, item) goes to acc + item ).

C sharp 14 makes the ref / out case less painful. Before C sharp 14, a lambda parameter carrying any modifier had to be fully typed. C sharp 14 allows modifiers on simple (untyped) lambda parameters, so the compiler infers the types from the delegate:

params is the exception, it still requires an explicitly typed parameter list. (Microsoft Learn, Lambda expressions and What's new in C sharp 14.)

-- pause --
Multicast delegates.

A delegate can hold multiple targets. Invoking it calls them all in sequence.

For Func<> returning a value, only the last target's return value is observed, the others run but their results are discarded. Use multicast almost exclusively for Action -shaped (void) chains; if you need all results, use a list of Func<> and aggregate manually.

Delegates are immutable. += and -= do not mutate anything, they are sugar for Delegate.Combine and Delegate.Remove, each of which returns a new delegate instance and leaves the original untouched. That has three consequences a senior candidate should be able to state:

+= normally allocates a new multicast delegate object. Combine can publish into spare capacity in the existing object[] when the array has room, so the array itself is not copied on every subscribe, but the wrapper is.
The one free case is the first subscriber: Combine(null, h) just returns h, so evt += h on an empty event allocates nothing.
-= allocates when it actually removes something, and is O(n): removal has to produce a new invocation list without the removed entry.
Two cases short-circuit and allocate nothing, removing a handler that isn't in the list returns the original instance unchanged, and removing one of exactly two handlers returns the surviving delegate itself rather than wrapping it.
GetInvocationList() allocates a fresh Delegate[] on every call. Two successive calls are never reference-equal. If you use the defensive-walk pattern on a hot path, that array is per-raise garbage, cache the snapshot if you raise far more often than you subscribe.

Invocation runs in subscription order, Combine appends, and the language specification says the invocation list is called in order. It is deterministic, but designing a system where handler B only works because it runs after handler A is a coupling you cannot see in either handler's source.

Events build on multicast. Skip ahead if curious.

-- pause --
Multicast exception behavior, the chain breaks.

This is a question that catches juniors and even mids. When a handler in a multicast chain throws, the remaining handlers do not run, and the exception propagates back to the caller.

Why this is dangerous for events. A naive MyEvent?.Invoke(this, args) is equivalent to chaining handlers, one buggy subscriber breaks every later subscriber. In a U I app: one bad event handler aborts the broadcast and the rest of the U I never updates.
In a domain event bus: one slow handler throwing means downstream side-effects (logging, audit, projections) silently skip.

Defensive invocation, walk the invocation list:

This pattern walks every entry in the invocation list independently, collects exceptions, and either rethrows as AggregateException or logs and continues, depending on whether handler failures are recoverable.
The cost is a small amount of boilerplate plus the Delegate[] that GetInvocationList() allocates per raise; the benefit is a misbehaving subscriber can't take down the publisher's broadcast.

Async multicast is even worse. Invoking a multicast Func returns only the last handler's Task. The earlier handlers are started, their synchronous prefix runs, but their Task s are dropped on the floor.
So an await chain() waits for one handler while the others race on unobserved, and any exception on a discarded Task surfaces nowhere at all: it becomes an unobserved task exception, visible only via TaskScheduler.UnobservedTaskException.
This is strictly worse than the synchronous case, where at least the first failure reaches the caller. For async fan-out, don't use multicast, store handlers in a List> and invoke them explicitly, sequentially or with Task.WhenAll.

In the real world: an order service raised a domain event with four subscribers, audit, search-index projection, customer email, and a metrics counter. A schema change made the audit handler throw on orders with no billing address, which was rare.
What got reported was not "audit is broken" but "search results are stale for some orders", because audit was second in the chain and the projection was third, so the throw stopped the walk before the projection ran. Two days went into the projection code before anyone looked at the publisher.
The fix was ten lines, the defensive walk, and the durable lesson is that in a multicast chain, the symptom shows up in the handler that didn't run, which is the one place nobody puts a breakpoint.

-- pause --
Delegate variance, in and out rules.

Delegates with generic parameters can be variant, assignable to delegate types with related (but not identical) generic arguments.

The two questions:
Is Func assignable to Func? No. Func is covariant, so the return type must be more derived going one way. Animal is not assignable from Dog in the output position. (Reverse holds: Func to Func works.)
Is Action assignable to Action? No. Action is contravariant, so the parameter type must be more general going one way. An Action doesn't know how to handle a Cat, so accepting it as Action would be unsafe. (Reverse holds: Action to Action works.)

Mnemonic: out = "Goes out, covariant, subtype OK"; in = "Comes in, contravariant, supertype OK." Or: the BCL's IEnumerable is covariant for the same reason Func is, both produce T s.

Custom delegate variance: declare your own with in / out modifiers:

Variance only works for reference types (and interfaces / delegates). Value types are invariant, IEnumerable is NOT assignable to IEnumerable (boxing would be required to materialize each object, which the runtime won't insert for variance).

Method-group conversion has its own, separate relaxation, and it predates generic variance by two language versions: method-group covariance or contravariance arrived in C sharp 2.0, generic in / out variance not until C sharp 4.0.
A method group binds to a delegate type if its parameters are more general and its return type more derived, regardless of whether the delegate declares in / out:

The Notify pair is the cleaner demonstration: the delegate declares no variance at all, yet the method group binds, while assigning one delegate value to the other does not.
That is the whole distinction, generic variance converts a delegate value of one constructed type to another; method-group relaxation binds a method to a delegate type, and applies whether or not the delegate is variant. It is why one void LogAnyEvent(object?
sender, EventArgs e) can be attached to every strongly typed event in a codebase.

Don't cite EventHandler as the invariant example, dot NET 10 changed it. It is now declared public delegate void EventHandler(object? sender, TEventArgs e) where TEventArgs: allows ref struct;.
Through dot NET 9 it was plain EventHandler with no variance annotation, so plenty of still-current writing (and plenty of interviewers) will call it invariant.
Nothing depends on which is true, because the Placed += Handle line is a method-group conversion either way, but on dot NET 10 the value-level conversion EventHandler to EventHandler now compiles as well.

The relaxation does not apply to a lambda: EventHandler h = (object? s, EventArgs e) goes to { }; is an error (CS1661 or CS1678), because an explicitly typed lambda's parameter types must match the delegate exactly.

In the real world: a diagnostics team wanted one handler wired to every event on a device-driver façade so that every state change was traced.
The first attempt declared Action and tried to assign it to each EventHandler field, which fails, delegate types don't convert to each other however compatible their signatures. The version that worked changed nothing but the shape: declare it as a method, void Trace(object?
sender, EventArgs e), and use += on each event, letting the method-group rule do the widening. Same code, same signature; the difference is that a method group is converted at each use site and a delegate instance is not convertible at all.

-- pause --
Lambda expressions.

A lambda is an inline anonymous function. Two forms:

Target typing (C sharp 10): lambdas are inferred against the variable's declared type, including for var:

You can also annotate attributes and return types on lambdas:

Two caveats worth knowing before you reach for either:

Attributes on a lambda have no effect at runtime. You invoke a lambda through the delegate's Invoke method, and Invoke does not consult attributes on the lambda. They exist for analyzers and for reflection over the compiler-generated method, nothing more.
(Microsoft Learn, Lambda expressions: "Attributes don't have any effect when the lambda expression is invoked.") A consequence: [Conditional] cannot be applied to a lambda at all.
A natural type is not always a Func / Action. The compiler picks a Func / Action if a suitable one exists and otherwise synthesizes a delegate type, which it must do for ref -kind parameters, default parameter values, and params parameters.
A synthesized type is not convertible to Func<>, so var is the only reasonable way to hold it (see the default-parameter section at the end of this page).

-- pause --
Method group versus lambda, what the compiler does differently.

Subscribing to an event has two visually-similar forms:

They look equivalent. They are not. The differences matter for unsubscription, allocation, and equality.

Delegate identity, Cached since C sharp 11 for static methods; an instance method group still produces a new delegate per conversion, Each occurrence is a different delegate instance.
-= removes it?, Yes, button.Click -= Handler works (and always has: removal uses value equality, not reference identity), No, button.Click -= (s,e) goes to Handler(s,e) creates a new lambda; the original is never matched.
Allocations, Zero after the first, for a static target; one per conversion for an instance target, Delegate per occurrence; closure too, if it captures.
Stack trace clarity, Shows Handler directly, Shows compiler-generated <>c.b__0_0, less readable.
Captures?, No (unless Handler is a closed instance method; then the target is the instance), Whatever the lambda body references.

The unsubscription gotcha (#1 cause of "I subscribed -= but my handler still fires"):

Lambdas A and B have the same body, but they are different delegate instances. The -= does nothing because the publisher's invocation list contains A, not B.

Two fixes:

What C sharp 11 actually changed, and what it did not. C sharp 11's "improved method group conversion to delegate" lets the compiler cache the delegate produced by a method group conversion instead of allocating a fresh one every time the conversion is executed.
It is purely an allocation optimisation.

Two corrections to the version of this story people usually tell:

The cache only applies where a static cache field can work, that is static method groups. An instance method group's delegate has to carry the receiver, and there is no single instance to cache, so p.Handler still allocates on every conversion. Verify it yourself:

It did not change -= semantics, and -= never needed it. Delegate.Remove matches on value equality, same Target and same Method, not on reference identity. pub.Click -= Handler found the previously added delegate in C sharp 1.0 and finds it now.
The reason -= fails for lambdas is not a missing cache; it is that two lambda expressions are two different compiler-generated methods, so they are unequal by definition.

Delegate equality has one more edge that catches people: it also requires the same delegate type.
Two delegates over the identical target and MethodInfo compare unequal if one is an EventHandler and the other an Action, MulticastDelegate.Equals rejects mismatched types before it ever looks at the target.

In the real world: a worker service subscribed to a message-broker client's Disconnected event with a lambda, inside the method that established the connection. Reconnects happened a few times a day and nobody noticed.
After a week-long network flap the on-call engineer found a customer with 60-odd copies of the same "connection restored" notification, because every reconnect had run the subscribe line again and every lambda was a distinct delegate,
so the chain grew without bound and nothing ever removed anything.
The one-character version of the bug is that -= on a lambda is a silent no-op, it throws nothing, logs nothing, and returns the chain unchanged. Moving the handler to a named method made both += and -= work, and the durable fix was to subscribe once at construction rather than once per connection.

-- pause --
Closures and capture rules.

A lambda can reference variables from its enclosing scope. The compiler captures them, moving them off the stack into a heap-allocated closure object so they outlive the enclosing method.

What gets captured:
Locals, by reference. The lambda sees the current value of the variable, even if it changes after capture.
this, captured implicitly when the lambda touches an instance field. Anchors the entire enclosing object.
ref / out / in parameters, cannot be captured; compile error.
ref locals and ref struct values ( Span, ReadOnlySpan ), cannot be captured either. The closure is a heap object; a ref struct may not live on the heap, so the compiler refuses:

This is the collision that bites when you modernise a hot path: you rewrite an allocation-heavy method to use Span, and the lambda or link call sitting in the middle of it stops compiling.
There is a way out, a local function that is never converted to a delegate can use the span (see below), and no way out at all if the A P I you're calling wants a Func<>.

Cost of capture: the compiler generates a hidden class to hold the captured variables, and the lambda becomes an instance method on that class. One heap allocation per entry into the scope that declares the captured variable, plus one delegate allocation per lambda creation.
Those are two different counts, and mixing them up is a common mis-statement:

The way out is not static, it is not capturing. Pass the varying value as an argument so the lambda has nothing to close over:

What static on a lambda really does (C sharp 9) is worth being precise about, because the common claim, " static removes the allocation", is not what happens. Roslyn already caches any non-capturing lambda in a static field on a generated <>c singleton class and reuses that one instance forever.
Adding static to a lambda that already captured nothing changes no codegen at all:

static is a compile-time guarantee, not an optimisation: it makes the compiler reject a capture you didn't intend, so an innocent edit ("just read _threshold here") can't silently reintroduce a per-call allocation into a hot path.
That guarantee is the whole value, and it is a real one, but claim it as a guardrail, not a speed-up.

Passing state instead of capturing, the BCL gives you the overloads. Once you know that a capture is an allocation, you start noticing that the framework offers a state-carrying overload almost everywhere a callback is taken, precisely so you can use a cached static lambda.
All of these are real and current:

The pattern is always the same: the callback becomes capture-free (so its delegate is allocated once for the lifetime of the process), and the per-call varying data rides in the state parameter instead of in a closure.
Note the gap in the list, Task.Run has no state overload, which is why Task.Run(() goes to Handle(item)) in a loop is one of the most common allocation sites in dot NET server code. Task.Factory.StartNew does, at the price of having to get its scheduler and options arguments right.

LoggerMessage.Define is the same idea applied to logging, and it is the clearest example of the technique in the BCL. It returns a cached delegate with the arguments in its signature:

Compare it with logger.LogInformation("Order {OrderId} processed in {ElapsedMs}milliseconds", order Id, elapsed Ms), which binds to an overload taking params object?[], so both value-type arguments are boxed and an array is allocated, on every call, whether or not the level is enabled.
The generic Define form keeps the arguments strongly typed all the way through. In modern code you'd normally get this from the [LoggerMessage] source generator rather than writing it by hand, but the generator emits precisely this shape, and knowing why is the interview-grade version of the answer.

In the real world: a team turned on structured logging across a high-throughput ingestion path and watched Gen-0 collection frequency climb sharply, with allocation profiles full of object[] and boxed Int64.
The logging level was Warning in production, so almost none of these log lines produced output, but the argument array and the boxes were allocated at the call site, before any level check the logger could perform, because that's what params object?[] means.
Moving the twelve hottest call sites to [LoggerMessage] -generated methods removed the allocation without changing a line of the message templates.
The transferable insight is about where the work happens: a level check inside the logger cannot save you from work the compiler already did at the call site, which is also the reason if (logger.IsEnabled(.)) guards exist at all.

-- pause --
Closure capture mechanics, what the compiler emits.

Capture-by-reference is the rule that breaks the most assumptions. **Locals are not snapshotted at the moment of lambda creation, the lambda sees the variable's current value at the moment of invocation.**.

What the compiler actually does (the classic interview "show me what's underneath"):

Two things to notice:
x is no longer a local, it's been hoisted into a field on a heap-allocated closure class. Every reference to x in the source (both the lambda body AND subsequent x = 20 ) now goes through __closure.x.
One heap allocation per closure scope, not per lambda invocation. If you create the lambda in a loop, the loop body shares the same closure, unless a fresh local is declared inside the loop (each iteration creates a new closure instance).

Multiple lambdas can share one closure:

.which is exactly why a closure can extend the lifetime of things you never meant it to hold.
One display class per scope, shared by every lambda in that scope, means the fields of that display class are the union of everything captured in the scope, and the longest-lived delegate keeps all of them alive:

The returned lambda captures nothing but id. It is nevertheless holding the megabyte, because payload and id were captured from the same scope and therefore live on the same closure object. Confirm it in a scratch project:

The fix is scoping, not cleverness, put the short-lived capture inside its own block ( { var payload =.; Inspect(payload); } ) so the compiler emits a separate display class for it, or set the local to null once you're done with it.

A second surprise from the same mechanism: the closure is allocated when the scope is entered, not when the lambda is created. The allocation happens even on a path where the lambda is never constructed:

If the logging branch uses a lambda that captures context, the display class is constructed on every call, including the overwhelming majority where debug logging is off. You can measure it without a profiler:

Run it with the branch condition forced false: a non-zero result is the closure you thought you were avoiding.

In the real world: a gateway service on a hosted plan started tripping its memory limit every few hours and recycling. Gen-2 was full of byte[] buffers, and the retention path went through a <>c__DisplayClass on a delegate parked in a response-cache entry. Nobody had cached a buffer.
What had happened is the code above: the caching lambda captured a small cache key, a sibling lambda earlier in the same method had captured the deserialised request body for a validation step, and both landed on one closure object with a lifetime set by the longest-lived of the two.
The change was four lines, wrap the validation step in its own braces, and the number that moved was the one nobody had connected to it: recycles per day, from six to zero. Worth internalising because it makes the guidance concrete: the unit of closure lifetime is the scope, not the lambda.

Local functions are the same idea with a materially different cost model, the single most useful thing to know here, and a frequent senior question.
When a local function is only ever called, never converted to a delegate, Roslyn hoists the captured variables into a struct display class passed by ref, so there is no heap allocation at all:

Measure both with garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread() and the first is flat zero. The moment you convert the local function to a delegate, Func f = Local;, you are back to a class display and its allocation, because a delegate has to be able to outlive the stack frame.

Closure storage, Always a heap class, struct by ref if never converted to a delegate; class if it is.
Allocation when only called, Yes (closure + delegate), None.
Can capture Span / ref locals, No, Yes, while it stays un-converted.
ref / out parameters, Only through a delegate type that declares them, your own, or the one the compiler synthesizes for a var -typed lambda, Yes, natively.
Recursion, Awkward (needs a pre-declared variable), Natural.
Generic in its own right, No, Yes.
static modifier to forbid capture, C sharp 9, C sharp 8.
Definite-assignment of captures, Must be assigned before the lambda, Must be assigned before the call.

The practical rule: if the callee never leaves the method, write a local function. Reach for a lambda when something else has to hold onto it.
The two most valuable applications are the argument-validation wrapper (the eager checks run at call time rather than at first MoveNext, because the iterator lives in the local function) and hot-path helpers that would otherwise allocate per call.

Captures and using /disposal: if a lambda captures an IDisposable local, the local can be disposed but the closure still holds the reference. Calls to the disposed object then throw ObjectDisposedException:

-- pause --
Capturing this, the leak risk.

Any lambda that references an instance field or instance method implicitly captures this:

The generated closure stores a reference to this, not to _name directly. The result: as long as the returned Func lives, the entire HotPath instance is reachable and can't be garbage collector'd.

Real-world leak scenarios:

Subscribing to a static event with a lambda capturing this, the static event keeps the instance alive forever.
Caching a Func in a long-lived dictionary when the lambda captured this, the dictionary roots the instance.
Background timer with a closure-over- this callback, the timer (queued in the ThreadPool ) roots the instance.

Detection: in a memory profiler, the leaked instance shows garbage collector root + DelegateInvocationList -> <>c__DisplayClass -> this. The closure class is always visible.

Defenses:

Roslyn does not do the "capture only the field" optimisation, and there is no version where it did. A lambda mentioning _name captures this, full stop, the compiler cannot know whether the field will be reassigned before the lambda runs, and capturing the field's value would change the semantics.
When this -leak matters (long-lived caches, static-event subscriptions), pull fields into locals explicitly.

In the real world: a service registered cache-population lambdas in a singleton IMemoryCache, cache.GetOrCreateAsync(key, _ goes to LoadAsync(id)), from inside a scoped request handler.
LoadAsync was an instance method, so the lambda captured this, so the cache entry rooted the handler, which rooted the injected scoped DbContext.
Symptoms were the worst kind: intermittent ObjectDisposedException on a DbContext "that we definitely never reuse", appearing only after a cache entry survived past the request that created it, and never once in a load test that ran with a warm cache.
The fix was to hoist what the factory needed into locals ( var id = _order.Id; var db = _dbFactory; ) before writing the lambda.
The general form is the one to remember: a captured this turns a per-request object into a per-cache-entry object, and D I scope lifetimes stop meaning what the D I container says they mean.

-- pause --
The foreach capture trap (and the C sharp 5 fix).

Famous interview question. Pre-C sharp 5:

Why pre-C sharp 5 was 3 3 3: the foreach loop's variable i was a single slot reused across iterations. All three lambdas captured the same slot, by the time they ran, the loop had finished and i held its last value (3).
The fix in C sharp 5 was to give foreach a fresh iteration variable on each pass, so each lambda captures a distinct i.

The same trap still exists with for:

To get 0 1 2, copy the loop variable into a fresh local:

Or just use foreach with a range / collection, since foreach got fixed.

Why this is far more dangerous asynchronously. In the synchronous examples the lambdas run after the loop, so the wrong answer is at least consistent, everything sees the terminal value.
Start the delegates on background threads and the value each one reads depends on how far the loop has advanced when that thread happens to get scheduled:

In the real world: a nightly reconciliation job fanned out over a for loop with Task.Run, capturing the index.
It ran green for months on a batch small enough that the loop finished before the thread pool got around to starting anything, so every task read the terminal index, threw ArgumentOutOfRangeException off the List indexer,
and, because the tasks were added to a list that a later refactor had stopped awaiting, the exceptions were never observed.
The job reported success while processing nothing. It surfaced when finance asked why a month of reconciliations were all identical. Two separate defects compounded: the loop-variable capture, and the unawaited tasks that hid it.
The fix for the first is one line; the fix for the second is to treat "a Task nobody awaits" as a review-blocking defect, because an unobserved task is where every other bug goes to hide.

-- pause --
Expression trees, code as data.

A lambda assigned to Expression> (instead of Func ) is not compiled to I L. The compiler converts it to an expression tree, a runtime data structure representing the AST.

Why this matters: IQueryable consumes expression trees, not Func s. E F Core, link-to-sequel, and any custom query provider walk the tree and translate it (for example, to sequel), they need access to the structure of x goes to x.Age > 18, not just an opaque function pointer.

What actually happens when you pass a Func to db.Users.Where(.) is worth being precise about, because the usual explanation ("EF falls back to client evaluation, or throws in E F Core 3+") describes a different bug. DbSet implements both IQueryable and IEnumerable.
A Func argument doesn't match Queryable.Where, which needs Expression>, so overload resolution silently picks Enumerable.Where instead, and the query provider is never involved at all:

There is no exception and no warning. SELECT * FROM Users streams the entire table to the client and the filter runs in memory.
E F Core 3's "client evaluation throws" change is about fragments of a query tree EF can see but cannot translate; it does not apply here, because EF never sees this predicate.
The tell at runtime is the adults is IQueryable check above; the tell at review time is a method signature taking Func where it meant Expression>.

In the real world: a generic repository exposed Task> FindAsync(Func predicate). It was written that way because Func is what the author had seen in link tutorials, and it passed every test, the test database had forty rows.
In production the users table had several million, and the endpoint that called it was the one behind the customer search box.
What made it hard to find was that the sequel looked innocent: a plain unfiltered SELECT on a table the team knew was large, which everyone assumed was some other feature's warm-up query.
Changing one parameter type to Expression> moved the predicate into the WHERE clause and the endpoint stopped timing out.
This is the highest-value thing on this page for anyone who writes data-access code: Func and Expression are not two spellings of the same thing, and the compiler will pick the wrong one for you in silence.

What the compiler refuses to put in an expression tree. Compiler-built trees support roughly the C sharp 3-era expression language; most of what has been added to C sharp since is not representable.
These are all compile errors, not runtime failures, and each one is a real question from someone whose E F Core predicate won't compile:

x goes to x = 5 (assignment), maps to, CS0832, an expression tree may not contain an assignment operator.
p goes to p.Manager?.Name (null-propagating), maps to, CS8072, may not contain a null propagating operator.
p goes to p is { Age: > 18 } (pattern), maps to, CS8122, may not contain an is pattern-matching operator.
x goes to x switch { 1 goes to "a", _ goes to "b" }, maps to, CS8514, may not contain a switch expression.
x goes to { return x * 2; } (statement body), maps to, CS0834, a lambda with a statement body cannot be converted to an expression tree.
async x goes to { await.; }, maps to, CS1989, async lambdas cannot be converted to expression trees.
() goes to [1, 2, 3] (collection expression), maps to, CS9175, may not contain a collection expression.
x goes to throw new Exception(), maps to, CS8188, may not contain a throw-expression.
() goes to LocalFn(), maps to, CS8110, may not contain a reference to a local function.

Also unavailable: ref / out arguments, dynamic, and unsafe pointer operations. This is still true in C sharp 14, the language has grown around expression trees rather than through them.
Practically it means your E F Core predicates are written in an older dialect of C sharp than the rest of your file, and the workaround for a switch expression or a null-propagation is to spell it out with and and, || and ?:, which the tree can represent.

Expression trees can also be constructed manually for codegen, for example, a fast property getter:

This is how libraries build accessors at runtime that beat per-call reflection. (Not every one of them uses expression trees for it, see the note on Dapper.)

-- pause --
Building an expression tree by hand.

The compiler can build trees for you ( Expression> ), but you can also build them programmatically, needed when the source isn't known at compile time (dynamic filters from a U I, search-DSL parsers, codegen).

Building a property accessor ( p goes to p.PropertyName where the name is a string):

Compilation is expensive, cache the compiled Func in a ConcurrentDictionary keyed by property name. Prefer the mechanism to a multiplier: Compile() walks the tree, emits I L into a DynamicMethod, and hands it to the jit, which compiles it on first invocation.
Invoking the result is then an ordinary delegate call. The two are different kinds of work, not the same work at different speeds, treat compilation as a startup or first-use cost and never put it on a per-request path.

Compile() needs somewhere to put that I L, and NativeAOT doesn't have one. System.Linq.Expressions ships an interpreter for exactly this case, and you can select it explicitly:

Under NativeAOT there is no runtime I L generation, so tree-compiling libraries run interpreted.
The behaviour is identical and the throughput is not, which is why the A O T-friendly successors to these libraries (Dapper.A O T, E F Core's compiled models, [LoggerMessage],
System.Text.Json source generation) moved the same work to source generators, building at compile time what expression trees build at runtime.
If you are asked "how would you make this A O T-compatible?", that shift is the answer.

Common builders in libraries:
AutoMapper builds member-by-member projection trees from MapFrom(src goes to src.Foo) overloads and compiles them, cached per type pair.
E F Core composes Where / Select calls by combining caller-supplied trees with its own.
**Dapper does not use expression trees** for its row materialisers, SqlMapper emits I L directly with DynamicMethod and ILGenerator, cached by the query's identity including the column schema.
Worth knowing as a distinct point on the spectrum: expression trees are the readable, safe way to generate code at runtime, and hand-written ILGenerator is the faster-to-emit, much harder to maintain way. Both produce a cached delegate at the end.

Rewriting trees: ExpressionVisitor.
Combining two predicates with and and is the canonical task, and it can't be done by just AndAlso -ing the bodies, each lambda has its own ParameterExpression instance, and a tree referencing a parameter the lambda doesn't declare will throw when compiled or translated.
The framework's rewriting base class exists for this:

ExpressionVisitor is the mechanism behind every predicate builder you have used (LinqKit's PredicateBuilder, specification-pattern libraries) and behind E F Core's own query pipeline.
It visits every node, rebuilding only what a Visit* override changes, the default implementation returns the node unchanged, so a visitor is usually one overridden method.

In the real world: an admin grid supported sorting by any column, implemented by building x goes to x.{column} with Expression.PropertyOrField and calling .Compile() per request.
It was correct, it passed review, and under a synthetic load test it was fine, because the load test sorted by one column.
Real traffic sorted by nine, plus paging, and C P U sat high with a profile dominated by System.Linq.Expressions and the jit rather than by anything resembling the application. Adding a ConcurrentDictionary keyed by column name turned per-request compilation into nine one-time compilations.
The trap is not that compilation is slow, it is that the cost is invisible in any test that exercises one key, and every dynamic-expression bug has this shape.

-- pause --
Events, pub or sub on top of delegates.

An event is a delegate field with restricted access, only the declaring type can raise (invoke) it; outside code can only subscribe ( += ) and unsubscribe ( -= ).

Convention: EventHandler. Two parameters ( sender and e ); by convention TEventArgs derives from EventArgs.
Note that it is only a convention now, the where TEventArgs: EventArgs constraint was removed from the delegate in dot NET Framework 4.5 and is absent in modern dot NET, so public event EventHandler? Ping; compiles.
(On dot NET 10 the declaration went further: EventHandler. where TEventArgs: allows ref struct.) Follow the convention anyway, because the whole ecosystem (designers, the relaxed method-group conversion shown earlier, every "log all events" helper) assumes it.

Why ?.Invoke and not if (Shipped != null) Shipped(.). This is a standard senior question and the answer is a race:

The snapshot is safe because delegates are immutable: -= on another thread builds a new delegate and assigns it to the field, and cannot alter the instance your temporary already points at.

The flip side is the part candidates usually miss, and interviewers usually ask: the snapshot means a handler that has just unsubscribed can still be invoked. It was in the list when you took the copy.
There is no way to close that window, it is inherent to a lock-free raise, so the obligation lands on the subscriber: an event handler must tolerate being called once after -= returns.
A handler that touches disposed state right after unsubscribing is a bug in the handler, not in the publisher, and "we unsubscribed first" is not a defence.

In the real world: a device-integration service threw NullReferenceException from a line reading if (_dataReceived != null) _dataReceived(this, e); roughly once a week, always in production, never in staging. It had been triaged three times and closed as "transient".
It is not transient, it is the check-then-invoke race, and it needs a device to disconnect (unsubscribing the last handler) in the microseconds between the two operations, which is exactly why frequency scales with real-world device churn and never appears in a test rig with one simulated device.
The fix is a single character: ?.. Worth knowing precisely, because "just use ?.Invoke " is repeated far more often than the reason, and the reason is what gets asked.

Memory leak risk: forgetting -=. If a consumer subscribes to a long-lived publisher's event and never unsubscribes, the publisher holds a reference to the consumer (via the captured this in the handler) and the consumer can't be garbage collector'd. This is the classic "event memory leak."

Defensive patterns:
WeakEventManager (WPF) for U I event subscriptions across long-lived models.
IDisposable wrapper that subscribes on construction, unsubscribes on Dispose.
Anonymous lambda subscribers + careful scope management.

-- pause --
Event versus delegate field, what protection events add.

A common interview question: "Why use event EventHandler instead of a public EventHandler field?" The answer is encapsulation enforced by the language.

The event modifier enforces three restrictions on consumers:

Subscribe ( += ).
Unsubscribe ( -= ).
Assign ( = ), maps to, only += / -= allowed.
Invoke from outside, maps to, only the declaring type can Invoke / ?.Invoke.
Pass as a Delegate parameter, maps to, (outside the declaring type), you must wrap or expose GetInvocationList().
Set to null to clear all handlers, maps to, declaring type can do this internally.

Why these restrictions are right. Without them, a buggy consumer can:
Wipe out every other subscriber by doing publisher.OnSomething = null; or publisher.OnSomething = MyHandler; (which replaces the chain, not appends).
Forge events by raising publisher.OnSomething.Invoke(forged Sender, forged Args), the publisher loses control of when its own events fire.

**The event keyword turns a public field into a public protocol**, subscribers can come and go, but the publisher owns invocation. That's the encapsulation a class should not have to defend by code review alone.

In the real world: an in-process message bus exposed public Action? OnMessage; as a plain field because "the event keyword makes it harder to test." A test helper did exactly what plain fields invite, bus.OnMessage = CaptureForAssertion;, to isolate its assertions.
That worked, because the bus was registered as a singleton and the assignment replaced every real subscriber rather than adding to it.
When someone later ran the suite in parallel with [Collection] sharing that singleton, unrelated tests began failing in whichever order the runner picked, with symptoms that looked like flaky async. Adding event turned the offending line into a compile error and the flakiness into a five-minute fix.
The keyword's whole job is to make "replace the chain" and "raise from outside" un-writable, and the objection it usually meets, that it complicates testing, is a sign the test is reaching for the publisher's internals instead of subscribing like everyone else.

-- pause --
Field-like events versus explicit add or remove accessors.

The event declaration has two forms.

Field-like event (what 99% of code uses):

The compiler generates:
A private backing delegate field.
Public add / remove accessors that thread-safely combine or remove handlers ( Delegate.Combine / Delegate.Remove ).
The class's own code can read the underlying field for invocation.

Explicit add / remove accessors (when you need custom storage or behavior):

When to use explicit accessors:
Custom storage (weak references for leak-resistant events, lazy allocation only when first subscriber arrives).
Side effects on subscribe / unsubscribe (logging, telemetry, lazy resource setup).
Combining multiple underlying events into one (a "facade" event that subscribes / unsubscribes from several sources internally).
Backing store other than a delegate field (for example, a List for ordering, or a priority queue).

Note: field-like events already have a thread-safe add / remove (since C sharp 4) using a lock-free Interlocked.CompareExchange loop, earlier compilers emitted lock(this) / lock(typeof(T)), which could deadlock against unrelated user locks.
You only need explicit accessors when you want behavior beyond combine or remove. Explicit accessors are not automatically thread-safe, the moment you write them, that guarantee is yours to reimplement, which is why the example locks.

C sharp 14 adds partial events, which matters if you are generating publishers. A partial event has exactly one defining declaration, which looks like a field-like event, and one implementing declaration, which must supply add and remove accessors.
That lets a source generator emit the storage and subscription behaviour while hand-written code declares the A P I surface, the same split that already existed for partial methods and properties.

In the real world: a plugin host used explicit add / remove accessors to keep a List alongside the delegate so it could report which plugins were listening.
The accessors were written without any synchronisation, because the original field-like event "was already thread-safe" and nobody registered that the guarantee came from the compiler-generated accessors, not from the event keyword.
Plugins loaded in parallel at startup, two add calls interleaved, and one subscriber was silently lost, producing a plugin that loaded successfully and then never received anything. Nothing threw.
The lesson generalises past events: when you replace a compiler-generated member with a hand-written one, you inherit every guarantee it was quietly providing, and thread safety is the one nobody writes down.

-- pause --
Removing a lambda from an event, why it doesn't work.

A subtle, painful gotcha. You cannot unsubscribe a lambda by writing the same lambda again, each lambda expression is a fresh delegate instance.

The lambdas have identical bodies, but they compile to two distinct delegate instances (each with its own compiler-generated method). The invocation list contains A; -= searches for delegates equal to B; equality compares (Target, Method) pairs; the methods differ; no match; no removal.

Fixes (in order of preference):

The Reactive Extensions library ( IObservable.Subscribe ) is built entirely around the IDisposable subscription model, partly because it solves this gotcha at the A P I design level.
IChangeToken.RegisterChangeCallback and CancellationToken.Register in the BCL return IDisposable / CancellationTokenRegistration for exactly the same reason: the A P I hands you back the thing to dispose, so unsubscribing can't depend on you reconstructing an equal delegate.

In the real world: a WPF shell wired Loaded += (s, e) goes to. and Unloaded += (s, e) goes to. on views built and torn down as the user navigated.
The unsubscribe lines had been written by pattern-matching the subscribe lines, so they were syntactically perfect and semantically no-ops, and the invocation list grew by one entry per navigation.
The visible symptom was not memory, it was that a form validation message appeared once, then twice, then five times, one per previous visit to the screen.
Duplicate-handler bugs usually announce themselves as repetition, not leakage, and that's the shape to recognise: an effect happening N times where N is how many times some setup code has run. The fix was to store each handler in a field and dispose the subscription on teardown.

-- pause --
Async lambdas, when async becomes async void.

The most dangerous lambda pattern in C sharp. Async lambdas have three possible return shapes depending on the target delegate type:

The third form is the trap. When you assign an async lambda to a delegate type whose return is void (any Action, EventHandler, EventHandler ), the lambda becomes async void.

Why async void is dangerous:

Exceptions are not on a Task, they propagate to the SynchronizationContext (or ThreadPool if none). In A S P dot NET Core, there's no SynchronizationContext, so the exception crashes the request thread; in WPF / WinForms, it crashes the U I thread.
The caller can't await it, you fire and forget. Any error timing is non-deterministic; the caller continues executing while the lambda is still running.
It's hard to detect, Func and Action look almost identical when written inline; the compiler picks based on what's expected.

The classic bug, event handler:

The safe pattern, wrap the async work:

Rule: async () goes to. is safe ONLY when the target delegate type returns Task or Task. If it returns void, you've made async void. Inspect every async lambda you write next to its target type.

How to spot it without reading types. The give-away is a void-returning delegate type: TimerCallback, EventHandler, Action, ParameterizedThreadStart and WaitCallback all return void, so an async lambda handed to any of them is async void.
Note that a non-void, non-task delegate is a different situation and a much safer one, Predicate p = async x goes to.;
doesn't silently become async void, it fails to compile with CS4010 ("An async lambda expression may return void, Task or Task and lt;T and gt;, none of which are convertible to Predicate ").
Only void is dangerous, because void is the one return type an async lambda can legally produce. Two A P Is that trip people specifically:

Neither overload has a Task -returning sibling, so there is no "correct type" to switch to, the design obligation is to wrap the whole body in try or catch and log, or to use a construct built for the job ( PeriodicTimer with an await foreach -style loop, or a BackgroundService ).

In the real world: a background service refreshed a cache on a System.Threading.Timer with async _ goes to await RefreshAsync().
When the upstream A P I began returning 503 seconds, RefreshAsync threw, the exception went to the thread pool with no Task to land on, and the dot NET default for an unhandled exception on a pool thread terminated the process.
The container restarted, the timer fired, it crashed again, a crash loop whose logs contained nothing from the application, because the throw happened where no catch and no logging middleware existed.
What made it expensive was the diagnosis, not the fix: the stack trace named RefreshAsync, which had a try or catch around its own body and demonstrably could not have thrown there. The throw was on the resumption after await, in a continuation whose caller was the thread pool.
async void doesn't lose the exception; it delivers it somewhere your error handling isn't.

-- pause --
[ThreadStatic] and AsyncLocal in closures.

A lambda captures locals. But what about ambient state, values that travel with the call, not the lambda's own scope? This is where [ThreadStatic] and AsyncLocal differ, and the distinction matters whenever a closure crosses an await.

Behavior summary:

Plain local, Method-scope, N or A, closure captures it as a normal variable, Yes.
[ThreadStatic] static field, Per operating system thread, No, after await, you may be on another thread; slot is fresh, Not captured (it's a static field reference), value depends on the current thread at invocation.
AsyncLocal, Per logical async flow, Yes, ExecutionContext flows it across await, Not captured, .Value is read from the current ExecutionContext at invocation.
ThreadLocal, Per operating system thread, initialized lazily per thread, No, same as [ThreadStatic], Not captured directly.

The closure-and- await interaction:

The closure object is heap-allocated. It survives the await because the awaiter resumption captures all closed-over state via the async state machine.
A closure capturing a plain local crosses await correctly; what doesn't cross is the operating system thread's [ThreadStatic] storage, which the closure doesn't capture in the first place.

Practical implications:

Correlation IDs, trace context, logging scopes, use AsyncLocal.
This is not theoretical: Activity.Current (the backbone of distributed tracing and OpenTelemetry in dot NET) is backed by a static AsyncLocal, IHttpContextAccessor stores the current HttpContext in an AsyncLocal holder, and LoggerExternalScopeProvider keeps ILogger.BeginScope state the same way.
If you have ever wondered why a scope opened before an await is still attached to log lines written after it, that is the mechanism.
Hot-path counters, per-thread scratch buffers, use [ThreadStatic] or ThreadLocal AND don't await inside the region that depends on them.
Capturing a local that you'll mutate after await, works as expected (the closure tracks the variable, not its value).

One trap specific to AsyncLocal: the value flows downward only.
ExecutionContext is captured and restored around each await, so a child task inherits what the parent set,
but a value set inside a child does not propagate back out to the parent, a common source of "I set the correlation ID in the handler and the middleware can't see it." Set ambient values at the top of the flow,
or use a mutable holder object (set the field on an object stored in the AsyncLocal ) if you genuinely need writes to be visible upward.

In the real world: a platform team built request correlation on a [ThreadStatic] field because it was "the fast one" and correlation was on every request. It worked in every test and in a staging environment whose synchronous handlers never actually yielded.
In production, log lines from after the first real await carried an empty correlation ID, not a wrong one, an empty one, so exactly the traces worth following (the ones that hit the database, that is the slow ones) were the traces that broke in the middle.
The class of bug is worth naming: [ThreadStatic] doesn't fail when you cross an await, it just quietly reverts to default, and every code path that completes synchronously will keep working and keep hiding it.

-- pause --
Function pointers ( delegate*, C sharp 9) versus delegates.

C sharp 9 introduced delegate*, true function pointers, leveraging dot NET 5+'s function pointer types. They're a lower-level alternative to Func / Action / delegate for interop and ultra-hot paths.

The unsafe block is not optional dressing: delegate* is a pointer type, so both the declaration and the call need an unsafe context and true in the project file.

Differences from delegates:

Heap allocation, One per instance (or cached for method groups), Zero, value type, lives on the stack.
Multicast, Yes ( += / -= chain), No, single function only.
Capturing locals (closures), Yes, No, must be a free static function.
Target object ( this ), Carries a target, None by default (managed); unmanaged variant carries no managed state at all.
Variance ( in / out ), Yes for generic delegate types, No.
Calling conventions, Managed only, Managed OR unmanaged ( Cdecl, Stdcall, Fastcall ), needed for P or Invoke.
garbage collector interactions, Holds a reference to target; participates in garbage collector, None, pure code address.
Available where, Anywhere, unsafe blocks (or via [UnmanagedCallersOnly] interop).

*When to use delegate over delegate:**.
Dispatch loops hot enough that the delegate object, its allocation, its garbage collector tracing, and the reference it keeps to a target, is itself the cost you're trying to remove. Measure first; the difference per call is small, and it is real only when the call count is enormous.
Native interop where you'd otherwise use Marshal.GetDelegateForFunctionPointer, plus the ability to state a calling convention ( Cdecl, Stdcall ) that a managed delegate cannot express without [UnmanagedFunctionPointer] marshalling.
Callbacks handed to native code, paired with [UnmanagedCallersOnly], the A O T-safe replacement for pinning a delegate and passing its function pointer.

When to stick with delegate / Func:
You need closures (capturing locals).
You need multicast.
You need variance.
You're not in unsafe code and don't want to be.

99% of application code uses Func / Action / delegate. delegate* is for the lowest layer, runtime libraries, native interop wrappers, jit-friendly hot loops.

-- pause --
Static lambdas (C sharp 9) and default parameters (C sharp 12).

static lambdas, explicitly disallow captures. Useful in hot paths where the closure allocation would matter:

Default lambda parameters (C sharp 12):

These lambdas do not have a Func / Action natural type, a point the feature's own documentation makes explicitly ("Lambda expressions with default parameters or params collections as parameters don't have natural types that correspond to Func<> or Action<> types"),
and one that is easy to get wrong because the var declaration looks so ordinary.
The compiler synthesizes a delegate type instead, named something like <>f__AnonymousDelegate0, and a synthesized type does not convert to Func<>:

The practical consequence: a defaulted lambda is usable through var at its declaration site, but the moment it has to cross an A P I boundary typed as Func<>, the default vanishes. If the default is part of the contract, declare a delegate type.

params in lambdas, C sharp 12 for arrays, C sharp 13 for collections. Two different gates that are easy to conflate:

params is also the one modifier C sharp 14's "modifiers on simple lambda parameters" does not relax, a params parameter still requires an explicit type.

Together these make lambdas close to feature-parity with regular methods; the remaining gaps are that lambdas can't be generic and can't be recursive without a pre-declared variable, both of which local functions handle natively.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

Single delegate ( Action a = () goes to Console.WriteLine("hi"); ):

Invoking it is one indirect call through _methodPtr.

After a += () goes to Log("bye"), a NEW delegate object holding an array:

Invoking a walks the array from slot 0 to calls ⟨1⟩, then ⟨2⟩.

Note what this is not: there is no Next field and no linked list. Combining two single-target delegates sizes the array exactly; a third += finds it full and doubles it to four slots, after which a fourth += can publish into the spare slot instead of copying.
_invocationCount, not the array's Length, says how many entries are live. The original single-target delegate is untouched either way, += produced a new object, because delegates are immutable.

Closure compilation (conceptual):

The "closure object" is a real, anonymous class. The captured local becomes a field on it. This is why captures cost an allocation.

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

The for capture trap. foreach was fixed in C sharp 5; for was not. Always copy the loop variable into a fresh local before capturing.
Forgetting -= on long-lived event subscriptions. Causes memory leaks. Pair every += with a clear unsubscribe path.
Multicast Func and the lost return values. Only the last invocation's result is observed. If you need all results, store delegates in a list and call them yourself.
Expression> invoked directly. It's a tree, not a function. You must .Compile() first (allocating an I L-emitting helper), and compilation is not free, so cache the compiled Func.
Capturing this accidentally. A lambda referencing any instance field captures this. If the lambda outlives the object's normal lifetime (for example, subscribed to a static event), the object can't be garbage collector'd. Static lambdas + explicit args avoid this.
Assuming a captured struct gets boxed. It doesn't. A captured value-type local is hoisted, it becomes a strongly typed field of the display class, stored inline, no box.
(Reflect over the closure's type and you'll see a field of the struct's own type.) The real cost is the display class allocation itself, plus the fact that the struct now lives on the heap for as long as the closure does.
Boxing enters only when you convert it to object or a non-generic interface, which is a separate mistake.
async lambdas returning void. async () goes to await. returns Task, but if assigned to Action, it becomes async void, fire-and-forget, exceptions disappear into SynchronizationContext. Always assign to Func for awaitability.
Different signatures for same delegate type. Func and Func declared in different lambdas are the same type. Don't redeclare custom delegates that already exist as Func / Action.
Hand-rolled events when you could use IObservable (Reactive Extensions). For complex stream-like scenarios (multi-subscriber, cancellation, replay), Rx is often cleaner than raw events.
Forgetting that delegates have value equality, and that it also requires the same delegate type.
Two delegates wrapping the same method on the same target are ==, which is why += of an already-subscribed handler silently creates a duplicate subscription rather than being a no-op (check first, or keep a HashSet<> of subscribers).
The edge that surprises people: an EventHandler and an Action over the identical target and MethodInfo are not equal, Equals rejects mismatched delegate types before comparing anything else. If your unsubscribe logic stores handlers as Delegate and re-wraps them on the way out, it will never match.
Writing if (Evt != null) Evt(.) instead of Evt?.Invoke(.). The first has a race between the check and the call; the second reads the field once into a temporary.
Related, and more often missed: even the correct form can invoke a handler that has just unsubscribed, so handlers must tolerate one call after -= returns.
Reaching for a lambda where a local function would do. A local function that is never converted to a delegate captures through an ordinary struct display class passed by ref (not a ref struct, the distinction matters if you go looking for it in I L) and allocates nothing.
If the callback never escapes the method, the lambda is pure overhead.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

A delegate is a typed method reference; an instance carries a target and a method pointer. Multicast adds an object[] invocation list plus a live count, an array, not a linked list, and no next field exists.
Delegates are immutable: += / -= are Delegate.Combine / Remove and each returns a new instance. GetInvocationList() allocates a fresh array every call.
The BCL trio, Action<>, Func<>, Predicate<>, covers nearly all signatures. Declare a custom delegate for ref / out, meaningful parameter names, or a domain concept used across many A P Is.
Lambdas are syntactic sugar for delegate instantiation. Captured locals are moved into a heap-allocated closure object, one per scope, allocated on scope entry, so a long-lived lambda retains everything else captured in the same scope.
Static lambdas (C sharp 9) are a compile-time guarantee against capture, not an optimisation: Roslyn already caches every non-capturing lambda.
A local function that is never converted to a delegate captures via a plain struct display class passed by ref, and allocates nothing, prefer it whenever the callback doesn't escape the method.
The foreach capture bug was fixed in C sharp 5 (each iteration gets a fresh variable). The for capture bug wasn't, copy the loop var into a fresh local before capturing.
Expression trees ( Expression> ) represent code as data. IQueryable providers walk them to translate (for example, to sequel).
Events are restricted-access multicast delegates. Forgetting -= causes memory leaks; pair subscribe with IDisposable -style unsubscribe.
Default lambda parameters (C sharp 12) and params lambdas (C sharp 13) brought lambdas to feature parity with regular methods.
Multicast Func<> discards all return values except the last, use a list of delegates if you need them all.

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this section once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, Multicast exception behavior.

Q: A handler in the middle of a multicast Action chain throws. What happens to the remaining handlers?-- think --

A: They don't run. The exception propagates out of the multicast invocation at the point of the failing handler, the chain halts mid-walk, every handler after the failure is skipped, and the caller sees the exception as if invoking the chain were a single call.

Cross-Q: For events, that means one bad subscriber breaks the entire broadcast. How do you defend against it?-- think --

A: Manually walk delegate.GetInvocationList() and wrap each handler invocation in a try or catch. Collect exceptions into a List and either log them, swallow per-handler, or throw an AggregateException at the end. This isolates each subscriber: one buggy handler can't block the rest.

Cross-Q²: Why doesn't dot NET do this by default for event invocation?-- think --

A: Because "swallow handler exceptions silently" would be the wrong default, it would hide bugs. Stopping the chain on first throw is the conservative choice: the publisher sees the failure, has to decide whether to recover.
The trade-off is that subscribers can DoS each other, which is why the defensive walk pattern exists. For domain event buses (MediatR), the convention is each handler runs in isolation and exceptions surface to the dispatcher, which decides.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Event versus delegate field.

Q: A junior writes public Action OnReady; instead of public event Action OnReady;. Why is it wrong?-- think --

A: With a plain delegate field, any caller can do instance.OnReady = null (wiping every other subscriber), instance.OnReady = MyHandler (replacing the chain instead of appending), or instance.OnReady.Invoke() (forging a fake event from outside).
The event modifier locks these out at compile time, consumers can only += and -=.

Cross-Q: But the field is still there underneath, right? Can the declaring class still misuse it?-- think --

A: Yes, the declaring class has full access to the backing field and can invoke or assign it freely. The encapsulation is enforced only against external consumers.
The contract is "outside code may subscribe / unsubscribe; only I decide when this fires." Internal misuse is a code-review issue, not a language one.

Cross-Q²: Show me when you'd use explicit add / remove accessors instead of a field-like event.-- think --

A: Three real cases: (1) you want to log or telemetry-count subscriber adds or removes; (2) you want lazy backing storage (don't allocate the underlying delegate field until first subscriber); (3) you want a weak-reference store to avoid the classic event memory leak.
The accessors give you a hook to insert custom logic between += and the underlying combine.

-- pause --
Drill 3, for loop closure capture.

Q: for (int i = 0; i Console.Write(i));. Then foreach (var a in actions) a();. What prints, and why?-- think --

A: 333. The for loop has one slot for i; every lambda captures the same variable. By the time the lambdas run, the loop has finished and i holds its terminal value 3.

Cross-Q: foreach (int i in Enumerable.Range(0, 3)) actions.Add(() goes to Console.Write(i));. Same trap?-- think --

A: No, C sharp 5 changed foreach semantics so each iteration introduces a fresh loop variable. Each lambda captures its own i, so the output is 012.
The for loop was deliberately not changed because i is a programmer-declared variable with an explicit for scope, while foreach introduces the variable as part of its statement.

Cross-Q²: I can't avoid for, give me the one-line fix.-- think --

A: Declare a fresh local inside the loop body and capture that: for (int i = 0; i Console.Write(captured)); }. Each iteration creates a new captured slot, so each closure binds to its own.
Modern alternative, Enumerable.Range(0, 3).Select(i goes to (Action)(() goes to Console.Write(i))).ToList(), also works because each link projection produces a fresh scope.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Func versus Func versus Action.

Q: Walk me through Func, Func, and Action. When does each apply?-- think --

A: Func is "no args, returns int" (for example, () goes to 42 ). Func is "takes int, returns int" (for example, x goes to x * 2 ). Action is "no args, returns void". The convention: in Func the last type parameter is the return type, the rest are arguments (up to 16). Action always returns void.

Cross-Q: Why does Func mean int to int and not (int, int) to void ?-- think --

A: Because Action exists for void returns, separating "has-return" and "no-return" into two delegate families. Func<> always has at least one type parameter (the return); arity-zero void is Action.
This separation also enables variance: Func lets the return co-vary and the parameter contra-vary, but a hypothetical Func that overloaded "two-arg void" with "one-arg int to int" would muddle the variance story.

Cross-Q²: When would you ever declare a custom delegate int Reducer(int acc, int item); instead of using Func ?-- think --

A: Three cases: (1) parameter names matter for documentation and IntelliSense, Func is anonymous; Reducer(int acc, int item) self-explains;
(2) you need ref / out / in or params in the signature, Func<> / Action<> cannot express ref-kinds ( delegate bool TryParse(string s, out T v) is the canonical example); (3) the delegate becomes a domain concept used across many A P Is and you want a single named type.
Otherwise, stick with the BCL trio.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Expression> versus Func.

Q: When does link care about the difference between Func and Expression> ?-- think --

A: IEnumerable.Where takes Func, it just invokes the delegate per element. IQueryable.Where takes Expression>, a tree representing the code.
E F Core, MongoDB, and other providers walk the tree to translate it (to sequel, BSON, et cetera), they need structural access to p.Age > 18, not an opaque function pointer.

Cross-Q: I assign a Func predicate and pass it to db.People.Where(.). What happens?-- think --

A: EF never sees it at all, and this is the part most candidates get wrong. DbSet implements IQueryable and IEnumerable. A Func doesn't match Queryable.Where (which needs Expression> ), so overload resolution binds to Enumerable.Where and the result isn't even an IQueryable any more.
The whole table is streamed to the client and filtered in memory, with no exception and no warning. E F Core 3's "client evaluation now throws" change is about fragments inside a tree EF can see; it doesn't apply here, because there is no tree.
The fix is to write the predicate inline as a lambda, the compiler then infers Expression> from the Queryable.Where overload, or to type the parameter as Expression> from the start.

Cross-Q²: How do I combine two Expression> predicates with and and ?-- think --

A: Not with and and directly, that's a delegate-level operator, not an expression-tree operation.
You build a new BinaryExpression with Expression.AndAlso(left.Body, right.Body), but only after rebinding the parameter: each lambda declares its own ParameterExpression instance, and a body referencing a parameter its lambda doesn't declare throws when compiled or translated.
The mechanism for the rebind is ExpressionVisitor, subclass it, override VisitParameter to swap the right-hand parameter for the left's, Visit(right.Body), then Expression.Lambda>(Expression.AndAlso(left.Body, rewritten), left.Parameters[0]).
That is exactly what LinqKit's PredicateBuilder.And/.Or and every specification-pattern library do internally.

-- pause --
Drill 6, async lambda becoming async void.

Q: I write button.Click += async (s, e) goes to await SaveAsync();. What's the risk?-- think --

A: EventHandler returns void, so the lambda becomes async void. If SaveAsync() throws, the exception doesn't surface as a faulted Task, it propagates to the SynchronizationContext (or ThreadPool in A S P dot NET Core), crashing the request / U I thread.
The caller can't await it and can't try or catch it from outside the lambda.

Cross-Q: What if I wrap the body in try or catch ?-- think --

A: Then exceptions are contained, but the lambda is still async void, meaning the caller still doesn't know when it's done.
For an event handler this is usually fine (events are fire-and-forget by nature), but you need to handle ALL exceptions inside the lambda, anything you forget escapes to the SynchronizationContext.
The pattern is: subscribe an async void lambda only with a paranoid try or catch (Exception ex) { _logger.LogError(ex, "."); } around the entire body.

Cross-Q²: How would you redesign the event to support async handlers safely?-- think --

A: Change the event type from EventHandler to Func. Now subscribers return Task; the publisher's raise method does foreach (var h in handlers.GetInvocationList()) await ((Func)h)(this, e); (sequential) or await Task.WhenAll(.) (parallel).
Exceptions surface as faulted Task s the publisher can observe. Most modern frameworks (MediatR notifications, Channel-based pub or sub) take this shape instead of C L R events.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Removing a lambda from an event.

Q: I do pub.OnX += (s, e) goes to Log(); and later pub.OnX -= (s, e) goes to Log();. The handler still fires. Why?-- think --

A: Each lambda expression compiles to a separate delegate instance, even if the bodies are identical.
The += added delegate A to the chain; the -= searches for a delegate equal to delegate B; delegate equality compares (Target, Method); the methods are different compiler-generated methods; no match; no removal.

Cross-Q: Fix it.-- think --

A: Three options. (1) Use a method group, pub.OnX += MyHandler; pub.OnX -= MyHandler;, C sharp 11 caches the method-group delegate, so both are the same instance. (2) Store the lambda once: EventHandler h = (s, e) goes to Log(); pub.OnX += h; pub.OnX -= h;.
(3) Use the IDisposable subscription pattern, wrap the subscribe and unsubscribe in an object whose Dispose does the -=.

Cross-Q²: For options 1 and 2, what's the difference in stack traces during exceptions?-- think --

A: Method group to the stack frame shows MyHandler directly. Lambda to the frame shows a compiler-generated name like <>c__DisplayClass3_0.b__0. The lambda also makes "find references" in the IDE find the call site, not the body, small but real ergonomic loss.
For long-lived production handlers, prefer named methods.

-- pause --
Drill 8, delegate* (function pointers, C sharp 9) versus delegates.

Q: C sharp 9 added delegate*. How does it differ from a regular delegate ?-- think --

A: A delegate* is a true function pointer, a value type holding just the code address. No heap allocation, no multicast, no closures, no variance.
A regular delegate is a reference type holding a target and a method pointer (plus, once it's multicast, an object[] invocation list and a live count) and supports all those features.
delegate* exists for native interop and for dispatch loops where the delegate object, its allocation and the reference it keeps alive, is the cost you're removing.

Cross-Q: When would I actually reach for delegate* ?-- think --

A: Three cases: (1) you're calling into native code with a specific calling convention, delegate* unmanaged[Cdecl] lets the runtime emit the right ABI without marshalling; (2) you're handing a callback to native code, where delegate* plus [UnmanagedCallersOnly] replaces pinning a managed delegate;
(3) a dispatch loop hot enough that the delegate object itself, its allocation, the reference it keeps alive, the garbage collector tracing it costs, is what you're removing.
Note what case 3 is not: it isn't "delegate calls are slow." It's that you've measured and the object, not the indirection, is the problem. Outside those, Func / Action is the right choice.

Cross-Q²: Can I use a delegate* in a closure?-- think --

A: No. A delegate* has no target (no this, no captured locals), it's just a code address. You can put one in a closure variable (capture a delegate* value into a lambda), but you can't have the function pointer itself capture state, that's what regular delegates are for.
The pointer can only target static methods (or instance methods via explicit conversion that loses the target).

-- pause --
Drill 9, Delegate variance.

Q: Is Func assignable to Func? Why or why not?-- think --

A: No. Func is covariant on the return type, meaning you can go from a more derived return to a less derived one, Func to Func works, not the reverse. A Func could legitimately return any Animal, including a Cat; treating it as Func would mean "callers expect a Dog and might get a Cat ", unsafe.

Cross-Q: What about Action to Action ?-- think --

A: Also no. Action is contravariant on the parameter type, you can go from a less derived input to a more derived one, Action to Action works (a method that handles any Animal certainly handles a Dog), not the reverse.
An Action doesn't know how to handle a Cat, so accepting it as Action would let Cat slip in unsafely.

Cross-Q²: Why don't value-type generic arguments participate in variance?-- think --

A: Because variance is a runtime type-identity operation, the C L R treats IEnumerable and IEnumerable as reference-compatible, so the same object reference works as either with no conversion code anywhere.
For value types that would be false: int and object have different representations, and bridging them requires a box per element, which variance has no place to insert. So IEnumerable is NOT assignable to IEnumerable despite int: object.

Don't reach for List to List as the parallel, though, that's a different rule. Variance is only available on interfaces and delegates; classes are always invariant, so List isn't assignable to List either, even though both are reference types.
List fails on "it's a class", IEnumerable fails on "T is a value type", and an interviewer probing this will ask which one applies.

-- pause --
Drill 10, [ThreadStatic] versus AsyncLocal across await.

Q: I store a correlation ID in a [ThreadStatic] field, set it before await SomeAsync(), then read it after. What might I see?-- think --

A: You might see 0 (the default), the ID was set on the original operating system thread, but after await, the continuation may run on a different ThreadPool thread that has its own [ThreadStatic] slot with no value set.
[ThreadStatic] is per-operating system-thread storage and does not flow across await.

Cross-Q: What's the right tool for "value that travels with the request, across await "?-- think --

A: AsyncLocal. Its value is stored in ExecutionContext, which the runtime flows across every await. A S P dot NET Core's HttpContext and E F Core's DbContext propagation rely on this.
The cost is small, ExecutionContext is captured and restored on every await, but the values are reference-shared, not copied.

Cross-Q²: A lambda captures a local int x = 42; and is invoked after await. Does the captured value survive?-- think --

A: Yes. Captured locals live in a heap-allocated closure object, that object survives across await because the async state machine holds a reference to it. The closure is just a regular dot NET object; it's threadsafe-by-isolation if the lambda is only called from one logical flow at a time.
So capturing a local works across await; [ThreadStatic] does not. The distinction: closures capture variables (heap, flow with the lambda), [ThreadStatic] is per-operating system-thread (does not flow).

-- pause --
Drill 11, Method group versus lambda.

Q: button.Click += Handler; versus button.Click += (s, e) goes to Handler(s, e);. Functionally identical?-- think --

A: Visually identical, semantically different in three ways: (1) the lambda is a fresh delegate instance with a synthetic method body; the method group binds to Handler directly (and as of C sharp 11 is cached, so repeated subscriptions reuse the same delegate); (2) -= matching:
method group can unsubscribe by pub.Click -= Handler symmetrically, lambda cannot (each lambda expression is a separate instance); (3) the lambda allocates a small closure if it captures anything from its enclosing scope;
the method group does not unless the underlying method is an instance method (then Target == this ).

Cross-Q: Why did C sharp 11 add method-group caching?-- think --

A: Purely to remove an allocation. Before C sharp 11, every execution of a method-group conversion built a new delegate object; in a loop or a per-request subscription path that was avoidable garbage collector pressure. C sharp 11 lets the compiler cache and reuse it.
Two caveats worth volunteering, because they're where the follow-up goes:
the cache is a static field, so it only helps static method groups, an instance method group still allocates per conversion, since the delegate has to carry the receiver ( ReferenceEquals on two conversions of p.Handler is false ).
And it changed nothing about -=: Delegate.Remove has always matched on value equality of (Target, Method), so pub.Click -= Handler worked identically in C sharp 1.0. Lambdas fail to unsubscribe not for want of a cache but because two lambda expressions are two different compiler-generated methods.

Cross-Q²: If I have Action a = SomeMethod; and Action b = SomeMethod;, is a == b ?-- think --

A: Yes (assuming SomeMethod is the same static method, or the same instance method on the same target). Delegate equality compares (Target, Method).
If SomeMethod is static, C sharp 11+ caching means a and b are likely the same instance as well; if it's an instance method, they're two distinct objects that are nonetheless Equals -true. One more condition that's easy to forget: equality also requires the same delegate type.
Action a = SomeMethod; and MyOwnVoidDelegate b = SomeMethod; are never equal, whatever the target and method, because Equals compares delegate types before anything else.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Lambda capturing this.

Q: When does a lambda capture this, and when is that a leak risk?-- think --

A: Any lambda that references an instance field or instance method captures this, even if the lambda only touches a single field. The closure object stores a reference to the entire enclosing instance.
It becomes a leak when (a) the lambda is stored somewhere long-lived (static dictionary cache, singleton's event subscription), and (b) the enclosing instance was supposed to be garbage collector-collectible. The lambda roots this, so the instance can't be collected.

Cross-Q: Show me how to keep the lambda but NOT capture this.-- think --

A: Pull the field into a local before the lambda: var name = _name; return () goes to name;, the closure captures the local name, not this.
For zero-allocation in hot paths, use a static lambda with explicit state: static (state) goes to state.Process(.), passing this as a parameter at the call site.
The static modifier (C sharp 9) enforces "no implicit capture" at compile time.

Cross-Q²: Profiler shows a leaked OrderViewModel. The path is MarketData (static) to Delegate to <>c__DisplayClass to this. What's the fix?-- think --

A: The OrderViewModel subscribed to a static MarketData.PriceChanged event with a lambda that touched its own fields; the lambda captured this; the static event keeps the chain alive forever; the viewmodel is rooted.
Three fixes (best to worst): (1) implement IDisposable on the viewmodel and unsubscribe in Dispose, called when the view closes; (2) use a WeakReference inside the lambda so the garbage collector can collect the viewmodel even with the subscription alive;
(3) replace the static event with a weak event source ( WeakEventManager in WPF, or hand-roll a ConditionalWeakTable -based pub or sub).
The IDisposable fix is the simplest and what every framework documents.

-- pause --
Drill 13, Closure capture mechanics.

Q: int x = 10; Func f = () goes to x; x = 20;. What does f() return?-- think --

A: 20. The lambda captures the variable x, not the value at the moment of capture. The compiler hoists x into a field on a generated closure class; both the lambda body and the subsequent x = 20 assignment go through that field. The lambda reads the current value at invocation time.

Cross-Q: Show me what Roslyn emits.-- think --

A: A compiler-generated <>c__DisplayClass0_0 class with a public int x field and a method whose body is the lambda's body, both referencing the same field.
The original method allocates one instance of the class, assigns x = 10, creates the delegate pointing at the closure's method, then sets x = 20 through the same closure field. The lambda's () goes to x becomes () goes to closure.x, reading the field at call time.

Cross-Q²: What if two lambdas in the same method capture the same local? How many closure instances?-- think --

A: One. Both lambdas land as methods on the same generated closure class, sharing the same field. This is how Action inc = () goes to counter++; Func read = () goes to counter; work together, they both read or write closure.counter.
The compiler picks one closure scope per "set of variables jointly captured by the same chain of lambdas." Disjoint capture sets get separate closures.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Action returning void, can it await ?.

Q: Action a = async x goes to await Task.Delay(x);. Does this compile? What's it doing?-- think --

A: It compiles. The lambda is marked async; the target is Action, whose return is void; the lambda becomes async void.
Awaiting inside is fine, the await machinery still runs, but the caller can't await the returned task (there isn't one), can't observe completion or exceptions, and unhandled exceptions inside the lambda crash the process via the SynchronizationContext or ThreadPool.

Cross-Q: If I want awaitability, what's the fix?-- think --

A: Change the delegate type. Func a = async x goes to await Task.Delay(x); returns Task, so the caller can await a(100);. Exceptions become faulted Tasks the caller can observe.
This is the same fix as for events: anywhere you have an async body, the delegate type's return should be Task (or ValueTask ), never void.

Cross-Q²: Can ValueTask substitute for Task ?-- think --

A: Yes, Func works the same way and avoids the small allocation per Task. Use ValueTask when (a) you have a fast-path that often completes synchronously (cache hit, no I O needed), or (b) you're allocating millions of these per second.
For typical "always async" handlers, Task is simpler and the marginal allocation cost is negligible. Either way, anything except void makes the result observable.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Building expression trees manually.

Q: I have a string "Age" at runtime and need Expression> equivalent to p goes to p.Age > 18. How?-- think --

A: Build the tree node by node. var p = Expression.Parameter(typeof(Person), "p"); then var prop = Expression.Property(p, "Age"); then var c = Expression.Constant(18); then var gt = Expression.GreaterThan(prop, c); then var lambda = Expression.Lambda>(gt, p);.
The result is a tree E F Core can translate to WHERE Age > 18.

Cross-Q: What's the runtime cost of lambda.Compile() ?-- think --

A: A different order of work from invoking it, describe the mechanism rather than quoting a multiplier. Compile() walks the tree, emits I L into a DynamicMethod, and the jit compiles that on first call; invoking the result is then an ordinary delegate call.
Cache the compiled Func in a ConcurrentDictionary keyed by whatever varies (property name, type pair), otherwise you pay code generation per request, and that cost is invisible in any test that exercises a single key.
Also know the A O T answer: there is no runtime I L generation under NativeAOT, so System.Linq.Expressions falls back to its interpreter, which is what Compile(prefer Interpretation: true) selects explicitly, and the A O T-friendly designs move the same work to a source generator instead.

Cross-Q²: How would AutoMapper, Dapper, or E F Core build a property accessor?-- think --

A: Same pattern, scaled up. Build a ParameterExpression for the source type, an Expression.Property or Field for each member, optionally an Expression.Convert for box or unbox, wrap in a lambda, compile once at startup or first use, cache by (SourceType, DestinationType) or (Type, PropertyName).
AutoMapper builds one projection expression per map; E F Core composes user predicates with its own.
Dapper is the instructive exception, it doesn't use expression trees for materialisers at all, it emits I L directly with DynamicMethod and ILGenerator, cached per query identity including column schema.
That's the spectrum worth naming: reflection per call (slowest, simplest), expression trees compiled once (readable, safe), raw ILGenerator (fastest to emit, hardest to maintain), source generators (no runtime codegen at all, and the only one that works under NativeAOT).
The shared trick in the middle two: generate once, reuse via a cached delegate, rather than a multiplier, the point is that reflection re-does per call the work these do once.

Cheaper alternative worth knowing: if all you need is "call this method as a delegate", you don't need a tree. MethodInfo.CreateDelegate turns a MethodInfo straight into a delegate, and for an instance method it produces an open delegate whose receiver becomes the first parameter:

csharp.
var get Name = (Func)typeof(Person).GetProperty("Name")!.GetMethod!
.CreateDelegate(typeof(Func));
get Name.Target; // null, nothing captured.
get Name(new Person { Name = "Alice" }); // "Alice".

One cached Func replaces every PropertyInfo.GetValue call, with no I L emission, no Compile(), and no A O T problem. Delegate.CreateDelegate(type, first Argument, method) gives you the closed form instead, binding a specific instance.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

Delegate: typed method pointer; instance holds _target + _methodPtr. Multicast adds _invocationList (an object[] ) + _invocationCount. No next field, it is not a linked list.
BCL trio: Action, Func, Predicate, declare your own only for ref / out, named parameters, or a real domain concept.
Lambda capture: lifts captured locals to a heap-allocated closure class, one per scope, allocated on scope entry, even on branches that never build the lambda.
static lambda (C sharp 9): forbids capture. A guardrail, not a speed-up, Roslyn caches every non-capturing lambda in a <>c singleton with or without the keyword, and Target is that singleton, not null.
Local function: struct display class passed by ref (not a ref struct ), zero allocation, until you convert it to a delegate, at which point it costs what a lambda costs.
foreach fix (C sharp 5): each iteration gets a fresh variable; for still bites, copy first.
Expression tree: Expression> is code-as-data; must .Compile() to invoke.
Multicast Func<>: only the last return value survives; use a list of delegates for all.
Events: scoped multicast delegate; forgetting -= is the canonical dot NET memory leak.
async () goes to. assigned to Action becomes async void, exceptions vanish.
Default param (C sharp 12): (int x = 5) goes to., but it's one lambda, not two overloads.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Event handler memory leak.

Problem: A long-running WPF or WinForms app gradually consumes 4 gigabytes after a day of use. Memory profiler shows millions of OrderViewModel instances retained, even though only ~50 are ever displayed at once.

Diagnosis: Capture a heap dump with dotnet-gcdump collect -p and open it in Visual Studio's Memory Usage tool or PerfView. Sort by retained-size; the top retainers are OrderViewModel objects rooted by EventHandler chains.
Walk the garbage collector root path: each OrderViewModel subscribes to MarketDataService.PriceChanged += OnPriceChanged in its constructor but never unsubscribes when the view closes.
The static MarketDataService holds a reference to every OrderViewModel ever created, the publisher is keeping the subscribers alive.

Fix: Pair every += with a -= in Dispose. Best practice: implement IDisposable on the view model, unsubscribe in Dispose, and ensure the host (window or page) calls Dispose on close. For weak-reference patterns, use WeakEventManager (WPF) or roll a WeakReference -based handler.

Why it works: Events are multicast delegates, the publisher holds a reference to each subscriber's (target, method) pair. As long as the publisher is alive, every subscriber is reachable, so the garbage collector can't collect them.
Unsubscribing removes the entry; the WeakEventManager pattern stores WeakReference s instead, allowing collection even if -= is forgotten.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

The lambda captures threshold, so the compiler generates a closure class ( <>c__DisplayClass0_0 ) with a threshold field; one instance is allocated per entry into the enclosing scope, plus a delegate pointing at the closure's method, plus Where 's iterator and the List that ToList builds.

Now the part that's usually stated wrongly: adding static changes nothing here, and removing the capture is what matters.
list.Where(static x goes to x > 5) allocates no closure and no delegate after the first call, but neither does list.Where(x goes to x > 5), because Roslyn caches every non-capturing lambda in a <>c singleton regardless of the keyword.
static is a compile-time assertion that no capture exists; it does not remove one and it does not remove an allocation that would otherwise happen.
Its real value is that it fails the build if someone later edits the body to read threshold, which is exactly how a hot path silently regrows a per-call closure.

The for variable i is one slot mutated across iterations, every closure captures the same slot, sees the final value 10. Fix by copying into a fresh local inside the loop: for (int i = 0; i Console.Write(captured)); }. Each iteration creates a new captured slot, so each closure binds to its own.
The foreach form has the same fix baked in by the C sharp 5 spec change. Modern alternative: Enumerable.Range(0, 10).Select(i goes to (Action)(() goes to Console.Write(i))), each link iteration produces a fresh closure scope.

Expression> when the consumer needs to inspect the predicate, for example, E F Core's IQueryable.Where walks the tree to translate to sequel; FluentValidation visits expression bodies to extract property names; specification patterns reify rules.
Cost: building an expression allocates more (tree nodes), and invoking requires .Compile() (expensive, cache the result). Func when you just need to call the predicate, much faster, simpler, no compilation step. Rule: in-memory filtering to Func; database or analyzed predicates to Expression.

EventHandler is synchronous-shaped, its return is void. Subscribing an async handler makes it async void: exceptions can't be caught by the publisher's try or catch and may crash the process.
Func (or a custom AsyncEventHandler ) returns Task, so the publisher can await each handler in turn or run them with Task.WhenAll, observe exceptions, and apply backpressure.
The dot NET-idiomatic answer for true async fan-out: Channel or IObservable (Rx), events are sync-shaped legacy; modern async pub or sub uses streams.

Method is the underlying MethodInfo invoked; Target is the this that Method is called against, and it is null only for a genuinely static target. For a method group like obj.SomeMethod, Target = obj.
For a lambda capturing locals, Target is the compiler-generated <>c__DisplayClass instance and Method is its emitted method.

The trap in this question is the static lambda. Target is not null for one. Roslyn emits non-capturing lambdas, with or without the static keyword, as instance methods on a singleton <>c class, so Target is that <>c singleton and Method.IsStatic is false.
Check it in a scratch project, note the lambda has to be given a delegate type first, since a bare lambda expression has no members to dot into:

The static modifier constrains what you may write; it does not change how the lambda is emitted.

Two delegates are equal when Method, Target, and the delegate type all match, which is why double- += of the same method group on the same instance creates a duplicate subscription, and why re-wrapping a handler in a different delegate type before -= never matches.