-- pause --
Section 1. Why it matters.

The dot NET BCL since dot NET Core 2.1 has been quietly rebuilt around a low-allocation philosophy: Span, ReadOnlySpan, string.Create, ArrayPool, ref structs, and source-generated paths.
The library team's goal, "you should rarely need to write unsafe ", is largely realized: the safe primitives now cover the cases that used to require pointers.

For a senior backend engineer, this matters in two contexts: (1) writing hot-path code (parsers, serializers, telemetry, framework internals) where each allocation costs measurable garbage collector pressure;
(2) reading the BCL source to understand why string.Concat pre-counts the total length and allocates exactly once (and why the + operator in a single expression compiles straight into it), why Utf8JsonReader doesn't allocate, why LoggerMessage source-gen exists.
The mental model is: "for every allocation, ask if it's necessary, and if a Span -based alternative exists."

this session is the practical end of the type-system chapter, ref struct, readonly struct, generics + unmanaged constraint all converge here.

In the real world: the interview version of this topic is almost never "make this loop faster".
It is "your p99 doubled after a release, average latency didn't move, C P U didn't move, what do you look at?" A candidate who reaches straight for allocation and garbage collector pause distribution is answering the question that was asked.
A candidate who talks about algorithmic complexity is answering the average, and the average is exactly the number that stayed flat. Everything on this page exists to make that first answer available under pressure.

In the real world: a team is told to "reduce allocations" after a memory-usage review and spends a sprint replacing foreach with for, caching string.Empty, and micro-tuning helper methods. Allocation rate barely moves.
The actual source, visible in the first five minutes of an allocation trace, is one middleware calling JsonSerializer.Serialize to a string for an audit log, on every request, including the ones nobody audits.
The lesson that survives into the interview: measure first is not humility boilerplate, it is the difference between a sprint and an afternoon.

-- pause --
Section 2. Core concepts.

-- pause --
The allocation taxonomy.

Five places allocations can come from in a typical dot NET app, ranked by frequency:

Object instantiation, new Foo() for a class. Heap allocation in Gen 0.
Boxing, value type stored in object / interface. Heap allocation, pure garbage collector pressure since the value type itself is small.
String operations, +, Replace, Substring, Trim, each returns a new string.
Array creation, new int[1024] (heap) versus stackalloc int[1024] (stack).
Closure capture, lambda capturing a local creates a heap-allocated closure object.

Expanding #5, because it is the one that surprises people.

A lambda that captures nothing is compiled to a cached static delegate, allocated once, ever. A lambda that captures anything forces the compiler to generate a display class ( <>c__DisplayClass.
), heap-allocate one per entry into the enclosing scope, and hoist the captured locals into it as fields. Three details that matter:

Capture is per-scope, not per-variable. All variables captured by all lambdas in the same scope share one display class. So a lambda that captures one int can keep a large object alive, because a different lambda in the same method captured it into the same display class.
This is a real and very hard-to-see leak source in event handlers and registered callbacks.
this counts. Referencing an instance field or method inside a lambda captures this, which pins the entire enclosing object for the delegate's lifetime.
static lambdas are a compile-time guard, not an optimization: static () goes to. (C sharp 9) makes it an error to capture anything. Use it on any lambda you intend to be allocation-free, and the compiler enforces it forever, including after the next person edits the body.

In the real world: a background job walks a work queue and starts one task per item:

csharp.
for (int i = 0; i < batch.Count; i++).
_ = Task.Run(() goes to Process(batch[i])); // captures i, not batch[i].

Some items are processed twice, some never, and every so often it throws ArgumentOutOfRangeException with i == batch.Count.
The for variable is one variable for the whole loop, hoisted into a single display class that all the lambdas share, so each task reads whatever i happens to be when it runs, not what it was when the task was created.
A foreach variable does not behave this way (C sharp 5 made it per-iteration), which is exactly why this bug survives review: the same-looking foreach version is correct. Two fixes: copy to a loop-local ( int idx = i; ) or capture the item instead of the index.
The allocation angle is the same mechanism seen from the other side, the closure is an object with a lifetime, and reasoning about it as if it were a snapshot is what produces both the leaks and the races.

Allocation isn't always bad, Gen 0 collections are fast. But on hot paths (request handlers, parsers, log formatters, serializers), persistent allocation pressure causes:
More frequent Gen 0 collections (stop-the-world, brief).
Promotion to Gen 1 or 2 (more expensive collections).
Fragmentation in the LOH for big allocations.
Inflated working set.

Rule of thumb: profile first (BenchmarkDotNet, dotnet-counters, dot Memory). Don't pre-optimize. But once you know where the pressure is, reach for the tools.

Growth: the allocation you pay for log N times instead of once.

Category #4 says "array creation", which undersells it. Most arrays in application code are never created directly, they are created repeatedly, by a collection growing. That is the single most common allocation source in ordinary crud code, and it is invisible because nobody wrote new.

List in CoreLib starts life pointing at a shared static empty array, so new List() allocates only the List object itself. On the first Add it allocates a backing array of DefaultCapacity = 4; after that, Grow computes 2 * _items.Length, clamped to Array.MaxLength.
Every growth allocates a new array, copies the old contents, and abandons the old array as garbage. So filling a list to N elements without presizing:

allocates roughly log₂(N) arrays, not one;
allocates and copies roughly 2N element slots' worth of bytes in total, of which all but the last array is garbage;
and puts the later intermediates over the LOH threshold for large N, exactly as the string-concat case does.

Dictionary and HashSet are worse per resize, because a resize is not just a copy: the bucket count moves to the next prime, both the buckets array and the entries array are reallocated, and every entry has to be re-bucketed into the new bucket count.
(The stored hash codes are reused rather than recomputed, the exception being the collision-resistance path for string keys, which does recompute them, so it is a re-bucket rather than a full rehash, but it is still O(n) work per resize on top of the allocation.)

The fixes are boring and effective, and each has its own version gate:

new List(capacity), new Dictionary(capacity), always, You know the size at construction.
Dictionary.EnsureCapacity(n) / HashSet.EnsureCapacity(n), dot NET Core 2.1, You learn the size after construction; returns the capacity you actually got.
List.EnsureCapacity(n), and the same on Stack / Queue, dot NET 6, Same, for the list-shaped collections.
CollectionsMarshal.SetCount(list, n) + CollectionsMarshal.AsSpan(list), dot NET 8, Presize and skip Add 's per-element work, at the cost of possibly exposing uninitialized elements.
Array.Empty(), dot NET Framework 4.6 / dot NET Core 1.0, Returning "no items" without allocating; new T[0] allocates a fresh object every call.

Two details that make this a senior answer rather than a tip:

ToList() and ToArray() are not always growth-bound. Both take a count-known fast path when the source can report its count, ICollection at minimum, and in modern link any iterator that can report one, which is what Enumerable.TryGetNonEnumeratedCount exposes publicly.
So some List.ToArray() is one exact-size allocation. The growth churn appears when the count genuinely isn't known ahead of time, a Where, a projection over a data reader, an IAsyncEnumerable drained into a list. That is where presizing (or not materializing at all) pays.
Never presize from untrusted input. Dictionary.EnsureCapacity 's own documentation carries the warning: "If capacity comes from user input, prefer letting the collection resize itself as elements are added instead of calling this method.
If you must use a user-specified value, either clamp it to a reasonable limit. or verify that the element count matches the specified value." A request that says "count": 2000000000 and sends three rows has just asked you to allocate a 2-billion-entry table.
This is the same failure shape as stackalloc sized from input, one layer up.

In the real world: a reporting endpoint does var rows = query.Where(Filter).Select(Project).ToList(); and typically returns a few hundred rows. A new tenant onboards with 400,000 rows and the endpoint starts triggering full GCs.
Nothing about the code changed and no single allocation is large, the list simply grew through every power of two on the way up, and the last several backing arrays were each large objects allocated straight into the LOH and then discarded.
The team's first instinct was "the query is slow"; the trace said T[], several sizes of it, all garbage. Two fixes, and they are different decisions: presize the list if you must materialize ( EnsureCapacity after a Count() ), or stop materializing and stream the projection to the response.
The transferable point: a collection that grows is a loop that allocates, and the size comes from your data, not your code.

The sixth category: allocations the jit deletes for you (escape analysis).

The list describes what the I L asks for. It is no longer what the machine code does. The jit performs escape analysis: it decides whether an object allocated in a method can outlive that method.
Microsoft's definition: "Objects 'escape' when assigned to non-local variables or passed to functions not inlined by the jit. If an object can't escape, it can be allocated on the stack."

What has shipped, gate by gate:

dot NET 9, maps to, Boxes whose lifetime is provably local (object stack allocation for boxes).
dot NET 10, maps to, Small, fixed-size arrays of value types with no garbage collector pointers; small, fixed-size arrays of reference types; objects reachable only through local struct fields; the Func /delegate object itself when it doesn't escape.

Three things follow that matter in an interview:

" new means heap" is now a half-truth. The accurate statement is " new on a reference type requests a heap object; the jit may satisfy it on the stack when it can prove the object doesn't escape." Say the second version.
Inlining is a precondition. An object passed to a method the jit did not inline is treated as escaping. This is why dot NET 10 also relaxed the inliner's size limits for methods returning small fixed-size arrays, the two optimizations only pay off together.
It is an optimization, not a contract. Nothing in the language guarantees stack allocation, it doesn't apply in Debug or tier-0 code, and the shapes it recognizes change every release.
You cannot design around it; you can only stop writing code that defeats it (capturing into fields, passing to non-inlineable virtual calls, storing into statics).

In dot NET 10 the remaining heap allocation in the delegate example is the closure display class itself, the runtime team's notes say stack allocation of closures is planned for a later release, not shipped.

In the real world: a team upgrades from dot NET 8 to dot NET 10 and their allocation-per-request number drops without a single code change. Someone writes it up as "the garbage collector got faster". It didn't, the jit stopped asking the garbage collector for several of the objects.
The reason this matters beyond trivia: the same team then "optimises" the hot method by extracting a helper, the helper is too large to inline, the array starts escaping again, and the win silently reverses.
The number regressed because of a refactor that looks, in review, like an unambiguous improvement.

Stack versus heap, what actually determines where a value lives.

This is the oldest question in the dot NET interview and the most commonly answered wrong, because the familiar answer, "value types go on the stack, reference types go on the heap", is not a rule about types. It is a rule about storage locations, and the type only participates.

The accurate formulation, and the one to say out loud: a value type lives wherever its storage location lives. Work through the cases:

int i as a method local, maps to, A register if the jit can enregister it; otherwise the stack frame.
struct Point p as a method local, maps to, Same, register(s) or stack frame, no heap object, no header.
int Count as a field of a class, maps to, Inside the class's heap object. There is no separate stack copy.
Point[] points element, maps to, Inside the array on the heap, laid out contiguously, no per-element header.
A local captured by a lambda, maps to, Inside the display class on the heap, the local is hoisted, and it is no longer a stack slot at all.
A local that lives across an await, maps to, Inside the state machine, which is on the stack until the method suspends and on the heap afterwards.
(object)p or IComparable c = p, maps to, Inside a boxed heap object.
A reference-type local ( var s = new Foo() ), maps to, The reference is a register or stack slot; the object is on the heap, unless escape analysis proves it doesn't escape (above).

So both halves of the folk answer are wrong at the edges: a value type is frequently on the heap, and a reference type's object is occasionally on the stack. The framing that survives cross-questioning is Eric Lippert's: the stack is an implementation detail.
What the language actually guarantees is lifetime and copy semantics, a value type is copied on assignment and its storage is reclaimed with whatever contains it; a reference type is copied by reference and its storage is reclaimed by the garbage collector.
Where the bytes sit is the runtime's business, and the runtime has changed its mind about it twice in the last two releases.

The stack you are actually spending.

The stack is not free-form space; it is a fixed reservation made when the thread was created, and you cannot grow it from managed code.

On Windows the default is the reservation baked into the executable's PE header by the linker, which is 1 megabyte unless changed.
On Linux the main thread's stack comes from the process limit ( ulimit -s, commonly 8 megabytes). CoreCLR uses a smaller fixed default on Alpine or musl. This asymmetry is why "it overflowed only in the container" is a real bug report.
The runtime honours a hex-valued DOTNET_DefaultStackSize (historically COMPlus_DefaultStackSize ) for threads it creates.
For a thread you create yourself, new Thread(work, maxStackSize) takes an explicit size; the documented meaning of 0 is "use the default in the executable's header".
You cannot set the stack size of a thread-pool thread, and in A S P dot NET Core your request runs on one. So the stack budget for a request handler is whatever the pool's threads were created with, minus everything the middleware pipeline has already pushed onto it.

That last point is the one that matters for stackalloc and for recursion, and it is why the stackalloc guidance further down this page is expressed as a small constant rather than "whatever fits".

In the real world: an expression evaluator parses user-supplied filter strings recursively. It has a unit test with a 5,000-term expression that passes on every developer machine and in CI, both Linux with an 8 megabytes ulimit -s, running on the test host's main thread.
In production the same input arrives on an A S P dot NET Core request, a thread-pool thread on an Alpine-based image, with a middleware pipeline already several hundred frames deep, and the pod dies with no exception, no log, and an exit code the orchestrator reports as a crash.
Nothing was wrong with the algorithm and nothing was wrong with the test. The test measured a different stack. The durable lesson: recursion depth and stackalloc size are properties of the thread you happen to be on, and the thread you are on in production is the one you have the least control over.
The fix that shipped was an explicit depth limit that returns a 400, not a bigger stack.

-- pause --
garbage collector fundamentals, generations, LOH, POH.

The dot NET garbage collector is generational, tracing, and, for gen 0 or 1 or 2, compacting (the LOH is swept rather than compacted by default, which is the source of its fragmentation problem). Allocations land in a generation; survivors are promoted to older generations.
The win is that a young collection traces only the young region plus whatever the write barrier has marked as dirty, so the vast majority of a long-lived heap is never touched.
Note the phrasing: the collector traces reachable objects and reclaims everything else, it never enumerates the garbage, which is why the cost of a collection scales with live data, not with how much you allocated.

The five regions (dot NET 5+):

Gen 0, New small-object allocations ( < 85,000 B ), Cheapest, only the Gen 0 region is traced, Most frequent; triggered by the Gen 0 allocation budget filling.
Gen 1, Survivors of one Gen 0 collection, Still cheap, Gen 0 + Gen 1 traced, Less often than Gen 0.
Gen 2, Survivors of two collections (long-lived objects, statics, caches), Most expensive, the whole heap is traced, Rarest; the one that shows up in tail latency.
LOH (Large Object Heap), Single allocations at least 85,000 B, Expensive (traced and reclaimed with Gen 2), Collected only on Gen 2.
POH (Pinned Object Heap, dot NET 5+), Objects allocated via garbage collector.AllocateArray(len, pinned: true), Collected with Gen 2, but never moves, Rare.

What actually drives collection frequency.

Don't memorise numbers here, they are per-process, and the runtime retunes them at runtime. Memorise the causal chain instead:

Gen 0 fires when the Gen 0 allocation budget is exhausted, not on a timer. The budget is dynamic: the garbage collector raises and lowers it based on survival rate and (under DATAS) on the size of the long-lived data.
So "how often does Gen 0 run" is a function of your allocation rate, which is the number you actually control.
Gen 1 fires when Gen 1's budget fills with Gen 0 survivors. More survivors per Gen 0 means more promotion means more Gen 1.
Gen 2 fires on budget exhaustion, on memory-load pressure, and on explicit garbage collector.Collect. It traces everything, so its pause scales with live heap size, not with allocation rate.
This is why a large cache makes every full garbage collector more expensive even if the cache itself is never touched.
LOH allocations are gen-2 allocations. Every 85 kilobytes+ buffer you allocate is a direct vote for a more frequent, more expensive full garbage collector.

The one number worth internalising is a ratio, not an absolute: the fraction of wall-clock time the process spends paused. The runtime computes it for you, see GCMemoryInfo.PauseTimePercentage and garbage collector.GetTotalPauseDuration() in the measurement section.

Why the 85,000-byte LOH threshold?

Copying cost, the garbage collector reclaims Gen 0 or 1 or 2 with a compacting algorithm: it copies surviving objects to remove holes. Past some size, moving the object costs more than tolerating the hole, so the LOH is swept rather than compacted by default.
The number itself was chosen by measurement, not derivation. Microsoft's documentation says only that objects at or this size are treated as large; there is no elegant reason behind 85,000, and an interviewer asking "why that number" is usually testing whether you'll invent one.
The honest answer, "empirically tuned, and configurable", is the better answer.
**It is configurable, upward. System.garbage collector.LOHThreshold in runtimeconfig.json (or DOTNET_GCLOHThreshold as a hex env var) has existed since dot NET Core 3.0.
The value must be larger** than the default and may be capped by the runtime; read back what you actually got with garbage collector.GetConfigurationVariables().
Raising it is a real tactic for a service whose natural buffer size sits just 85 kilobytes, but it makes those buffers compactable and copied, so it is a trade, not a free win.

LOH consequences:

No compaction by default (you can opt in with GCSettings.LargeObjectHeapCompactionMode = CompactOnce then trigger a Gen 2 collection, expensive, use sparingly).
Fragmentation, repeatedly allocating or freeing differently-sized big objects leaves holes the garbage collector can't reuse efficiently.
Gen 2 pressure, every LOH allocation is essentially a Gen 2 allocation; bulk LOH activity drives Gen 2 collection frequency up.

In the real world: an export endpoint reads a file with File.ReadAllBytes and hands the array to a hashing routine. Files are typically 40 kilobytes, so nothing looks wrong. Then a customer uploads 300 kilobytes files and the service starts doing full GCs during business hours.
Nobody wrote a "large object", they wrote ReadAllBytes, and the size came from a customer. The general shape: LOH pressure is usually inherited from input, not authored, which is why it shows up in production and not in the load test with the synthetic 10 kilobytes fixture.

Regions, not segments (dot NET 7+).

Older material, and older interviewers, describe the garbage collector heap as a set of large segments (on the order of hundreds of megabytes reserved per heap).
Starting in dot NET 7, the garbage collector heap switched its physical representation from segments to regions on 64-bit Windows and Linux.
This is worth knowing because it changes what several older recommendations mean:

A region is 4 megabytes for the small object heap by default; UOH (LOH + POH) regions are eight times the SOH region size. Tunable via System.garbage collector.RegionSize / DOTNET_GCRegionSize, though the docs' advice is that most apps shouldn't.
At startup the garbage collector reserves, not commits, a large virtual range for regions. With no other configuration and no memory constraint, that reservation is 256 gigabytes (larger on machines with more than 256 gigabytes of RAM).
Reserved virtual address space is not memory in use; a monitoring dashboard that alarms on virtual size will page you for nothing.
Because regions are small and individually decommittable, the garbage collector can return memory to the operating system at a much finer granularity than a segment allowed. That is what makes DATAS (below) practicable at all.
Consequence for advice you may have inherited: System.garbage collector.RetainVM ("put segments on a standby list instead of releasing them") is a segment-era knob whose default is false, and it is not the general-purpose throughput switch it was sometimes presented as.

Write barriers and card tables, why storing a reference costs more than storing an int.

This is the mechanism behind generational garbage collector, and the one senior candidates most often can't explain.

The generational trick only works if a Gen 0 collection can avoid tracing Gen 2. But a Gen 2 object can hold a reference to a Gen 0 object ( _cache[key] = newlyAllocatedItem; ), and that Gen 0 object must not be collected. Tracing all of Gen 2 to find such references would defeat the entire design.

The runtime's answer: every write of a reference into a heap field goes through a write barrier, a small snippet of code the jit emits at the assignment site. The barrier records that a region of the older heap has been dirtied, in a side structure called the card table.
At collection time the garbage collector traces the young generations plus only the dirty cards, instead of all of Gen 2.

Three practical consequences:

Reference-typed fields are more expensive to write than value-typed ones, everywhere, not just in hot loops. This is one real argument for storing an index or an id instead of an object reference in a large, frequently-mutated structure.
Arrays of structs beat arrays of classes twice over, no per-element object header, and no write barrier when you assign the elements (assuming the struct itself holds no references).
The barrier implementation is a tuning surface for the runtime team. dot NET 10 brought the dynamically-switchable write-barrier implementation to Arm64, with a default that models garbage collector regions more precisely, trading a little write throughput for shorter collections.
It's a good example to cite when asked "what has actually changed in the garbage collector recently".

Pinned Object Heap (POH, dot NET 5+).

Before POH, pinning an object via fixed (byte* p = arr) or GCHandle.Alloc(arr, GCHandleType.Pinned) left the object in its current generation, typically Gen 0, but marked it un-moveable. This blocks compaction during the next collection, leaving holes around the pinned object: heap fragmentation.

POH separates pinned allocations into their own region from day one. The garbage collector knows nothing in POH will ever move, so it doesn't try to compact around it.

When to use POH:

Long-lived buffers passed to native interop (the operating system or driver holds the pointer for hours).
Network pipelines (Kestrel, G R P C) where the kernel writes directly into managed buffers.
Scenarios where you'd otherwise pin frequently and fragment the heap.

Most application code never touches POH directly, the BCL uses it internally (for example, System.IO.Pipelines, socket buffers).

What keeps an object alive, the root set.

Everything describes how the collector reclaims. This is the other half: how it decides what not to reclaim. A tracing collector starts from a set of roots and marks everything reachable; unreachable is a synonym for garbage.
So every "memory leak" in dot NET is really the same question, what is still pointing at this?, and being able to enumerate the root set is what lets you answer it.

The roots are:

Stack slots and registers of every thread, maps to, Live locals, as reported by the jit's garbage collector info for the exact instruction pointer.
Static fields, maps to, One set per type, per closed generic type for generics, alive for the life of the load context. [ThreadStatic] gives one per thread.
garbage collector handles, maps to, GCHandleType.Normal (a strong reference held outside the heap), Pinned (strong and immovable), and the weak variants.
The finalization queue, maps to, An object with a pending finalizer is reachable until the finalizer thread has run it, which is why a finalizer extends lifetime rather than shortening it.
Runtime-internal structures, maps to, Loaded types, interned string literals, and the execution context, AsyncLocal values are reachable from every live async operation that flowed them.

Two consequences that are worth stating precisely, because interviewers use them as the follow-up.

1. Liveness is what the jit can prove, not what your braces say. An object becomes collectable at the last instruction that actually reads it, not at the closing brace of its scope.
In Release code the jit reports a local as dead once nothing reads it again, so an object can be finalized while one of its own instance methods is still executing, and a delegate passed to native code can be collected while native code still holds the function pointer.
That is exactly the scenario garbage collector.KeepAlive exists for:
the docs describe it as ensuring "the existence of a reference to an object that is at risk of being prematurely reclaimed", for the case where "there are no references to the object in managed code or data, but the object is still in use in unmanaged code".
Its own example is a SetConsoleCtrlHandler delegate, kept alive by a garbage collector.KeepAlive(hr) placed at the end of the range where the delegate must survive, "code this method at the end, not the beginning".

In practice the better answer is "hold it in a field, or use SafeHandle ", garbage collector.KeepAlive is the fix for code you cannot restructure.

**2. There is a whole family of weak roots, and choosing among them is a design decision.**.

WeakReference ( track Resurrection: false, the default), maps to, A short weak reference. Cleared as soon as the object is collected, you never observe a finalized object through it.
WeakReference(target, track Resurrection: true), maps to, A long weak reference. Survives until the object's memory is actually reclaimed, so the target may be an object whose finalizer has already run. Rarely what you want.
ConditionalWeakTable, maps to, Holds the key weakly and keeps the value alive only for as long as the key is alive. The way to attach state to objects you don't own without rooting them, and unlike a Dictionary, a value that references its own key does not leak the pair.
System.Runtime.DependentHandle (dot NET 6+, public), maps to, The primitive ConditionalWeakTable is built on: a weak reference to a target plus a dependent that is kept alive as long as the target is.

The managed leak taxonomy, in a managed process there is no leak in the C sense; there is unintended retention, and it comes from a short list:

A static collection that only ever grows, a cache with no eviction, a ConcurrentDictionary used as a memo table keyed by something unbounded. This is the most common one by a wide margin.
An event whose subscribers never unsubscribe. publisher.Changed += handler puts a strong reference to the subscriber in the publisher's invocation list. A long-lived publisher therefore roots every short-lived subscriber that ever attached.
A captured closure held by something long-lived, a registered callback, a Timer, a CancellationToken.Register that is never disposed. The display class roots everything else captured in that scope, per the closure rules.
A pooled buffer of reference type returned without clear Array: true, the pool becomes the root, as described under ArrayPool.
A pending finalizer that can't run, a blocked finalizer thread means every finalizable object behind it stays reachable.

How to find it, in the order you'd actually do it.

The tool that answers "who references this" is not a profiler you have to install:

The discipline that makes this fast: compare two snapshots rather than staring at one. A single heap dump of a healthy service also contains millions of objects.
What identifies a leak is the delta between two dumps taken under the same load, and then exactly one gcroot on one instance of the type that grew. Both tools see managed memory only, if the heap is flat and RSS is climbing, you are in native memory and this workflow will tell you nothing.

In the real world: a singleton configuration service exposes event Action Changed, and a scoped request-handling class subscribes in its constructor. Nobody unsubscribes, because nobody thought of the subscription as a resource.
The heap grows linearly with total requests served, forever; Gen 2 grows with it, so full GCs get slower and slower over a deployment's lifetime and the pod is "fixed" by the weekly restart that everyone has stopped noticing.
Two gcdumps an hour apart showed the handler's declaring type multiplying; one gcroot showed the path, static singleton to event field to Action invocation list to each subscriber. The fix is -= in Dispose, and the design fix is to not have a singleton publish to scoped subscribers at all.
The transferable sentence: += is an assignment into a field owned by the publisher, and the publisher's lifetime is now your lifetime.

In the real world: a service adds a static readonly ConcurrentDictionary to cache parsed query strings, keyed by the raw query. It is correct, it is fast, and it is unbounded, the key space is whatever clients send. Memory climbs for days and then the pod OOM-kills.
Everyone calls it a leak; it is not, it is retention working exactly as written.
The distinction matters in an interview, because the fixes are different: a leak is fixed by dropping a reference, unbounded retention is fixed by choosing an eviction policy ( MemoryCache with a size limit and SetSize on entries, or an LRU).
The question that separates the two is "if I stop the load, does it go back down?"

In the real world: an interop wrapper registers a managed callback with a native audio library and passes the delegate directly into the P or Invoke. It runs fine for hours in testing and crashes intermittently in production with a native access violation and no managed stack.
The delegate was a local, never referenced again after registration, and the garbage collector, correctly, collected it while the native library still held its function pointer. This is not a race in the usual sense and no amount of locking helps.
The fixes, in order of preference: store the delegate in a field of an object with the right lifetime; keep a GCHandle and free it on teardown; or garbage collector.KeepAlive at the end of the range.
The general lesson worth carrying: the moment a reference leaves managed code, the garbage collector stops being able to see it, and lifetime becomes your problem.

-- pause --
Workstation versus Server garbage collector; concurrent versus background.

Two orthogonal axes control garbage collector behavior. They're set at process start via the .runtimeconfig.json or environment variables and cannot be changed after the process is running.

Workstation versus Server.

Heap layout, One heap, shared, One heap per logical C P U.
garbage collector threads, Same as user thread (stop-the-world on one thread), Dedicated garbage collector thread per heap, runs in parallel.
Allocation throughput, Lower (single heap = contention), Much higher (per-C P U heaps, near-zero contention).
Pause time, Often higher (single-threaded mark or sweep), Lower per pause (parallel mark or sweep across heaps).
Memory footprint, Smaller, Larger (a heap and an allocation budget per C P U).
Default for, Console apps, desktop, libraries, A S P dot NET Core, services.

The precise rule is worth stating precisely, because it is a favourite follow-up. Microsoft's documentation puts it two ways, and both matter:

Workstation garbage collector "is the default garbage collector flavor for standalone apps.
For hosted apps, for example, those hosted by A S P dot NET, the host determines the default garbage collector flavor", which is why an A S P dot NET Core app gets Server garbage collector without you asking, and a console app that references the same libraries does not.
"Workstation garbage collection is always used on a computer that has only one logical C P U, regardless of the configuration setting." So true on a 1-vCPU container is silently a no-op, a very common source of "I configured it and nothing changed".

Verify at runtime with GCSettings.IsServerGC. Logging it once at startup, next to the process's C P U and memory limits, converts an entire category of production mystery into a grep.

Concurrent / Background garbage collector.

Concurrent garbage collector (workstation) and Background garbage collector (server, dot NET 4.5+) allow most of a Gen 2 collection to run on a background thread while user threads keep allocating in Gen 0. The stop-the-world phase shrinks to the brief mark roots + end-of-collection compact step.

Background garbage collector, System.garbage collector.Concurrent: true (the default), Gen 2 runs mostly in background; Gen 0 or 1 still stop-the-world but very fast.
Non-concurrent, System.garbage collector.Concurrent: false, All collections stop-the-world; lower latency variance but worse p99 under load.

Config for a web service (in .csproj, which the S D K writes into runtimeconfig.json ):

Both of those are already the effective defaults for an A S P dot NET Core app on a multi-C P U host; setting them explicitly is documentation, not tuning. Resist adding more.
In particular ( System.garbage collector.RetainVM ) defaults to false, release memory to the operating system, and is a segment-era knob; in the regions world it is not a general throughput switch.

Or via environment variables (containers, note the runtime reads these only at garbage collector initialization, so changing them on a running process does nothing):

Dynamic Adaptation to Application Sizes (DATAS).

DATAS makes the Server garbage collector heap size track the application's live data instead of the machine's C P U count, it starts with one heap and adds heaps only when the measured throughput cost of collecting justifies it.
This is the fix for the classic "Server garbage collector ate my 256 megabytes pod" complaint.

The version gate is the part people get wrong: DATAS was introduced in dot NET 8 and is enabled by default starting in dot NET 9.
On dot NET 9 and dot NET 10 you are already running it, so the realistic action is the opposite of the one usually quoted, if a throughput-sensitive service regressed on the dot NET 9 upgrade, the experiment is to turn DATAS off and compare:

MSBuild property, maps to, 0.
runtimeconfig.json, maps to, System.garbage collector.DynamicAdaptationMode: 0.
Environment variable, maps to, DOTNET_GCDynamicAdaptationMode set to 0.

Heap hard limits and containers, the mechanism behind "why does my pod OOM-kill?"

A container memory limit is enforced by the kernel, which has no idea what a garbage collector is.
Left to itself the runtime would size its heap for the machine, allocate past the cgroup limit, and be killed, with no managed exception, no stack trace, and an exit code the orchestrator reports as OOMKilled.
The runtime therefore reads the cgroup limit and sets a heap hard limit:

System.garbage collector.HeapHardLimit / DOTNET_GCHeapHardLimit, maximum commit size for the garbage collector heap plus garbage collector bookkeeping, in bytes (64-bit only).
System.garbage collector.HeapHardLimitPercent / DOTNET_GCHeapHardLimitPercent, the same thing as a percentage. In a memory-limited environment the container limit is treated as total physical memory, and the default is 75%.
With neither set and a limit present, the documented default is 20 megabytes or the heap-hard-limit percent of the container limit, whichever is larger.
Related and separate: System.garbage collector.HighMemoryPercent ( DOTNET_GCHighMemPercent ), default 90%, is the memory-load level at which the garbage collector switches to aggressive full compacting collections to avoid paging.
In a container, "memory load" is measured against the container limit.

Two things a senior candidate should say out loud about this:

The 25% that the hard limit leaves is not slack, it is the rest of your process, native allocations, the jit, thread stacks, buffers held by native libraries, the runtime itself. A managed heap sized at 100% of the pod limit guarantees an OOM kill.
OutOfMemoryException and OOMKilled are different failures. The first means the garbage collector hit its limit and told you in managed code; the second means the kernel hit its limit and told nobody. If you only ever see the second, your managed heap is not the thing that grew.

In the real world: a service is moved from VMs to Kubernetes with a 512 megabytes limit and starts getting killed under load that the VMs handled comfortably.
Memory dashboards show the managed heap sitting well under the limit the whole time, which is exactly why the investigation takes a week, everyone is watching the heap. The growth is in native memory held by a compression library and by thread stacks from an unbounded degree of parallelism.
The durable lesson: the garbage collector's hard limit governs the managed heap only, and a container limit is a budget for the whole process.

In the real world: a team sets DOTNET_gcServer set to 1 in the deployment manifest for a sidecar running on a 1-vCPU pod, ships it, and reports no change. There is no bug and no typo, the runtime uses Workstation garbage collector on a single-logical-C P U machine regardless of configuration.
The tell would have been one startup log line printing GCSettings.IsServerGC, which is why that line is worth its cost.

Latency modes and no-garbage collector regions, the two knobs you can change at runtime.

Everything is set at process start. Two things are not, and they are the interesting ones because they let you tell the garbage collector something it cannot infer.

GCSettings.LatencyMode takes a System.Runtime.GCLatencyMode. The documented members and their real constraints:

Batch, Disables garbage collector concurrency, collects in a batch. "The most intrusive mode. maximum throughput at the expense of responsiveness", Overrides the gc Concurrent setting, switching to Batch stops further concurrent collections.
Interactive, Concurrent collection while the app runs. The default, The default for workstation; for a hosted app the host's settings take precedence.
LowLatency, Suppresses gen 2 entirely; only gen 0 and gen 1 run. A full collection happens anyway if the system is under memory pressure, Not available for Server garbage collector. Intended for short windows only.
SustainedLowLatency, Suppresses foreground gen 2; gen 0, gen 1, and background gen 2 still run, Available for workstation and server, but not if background garbage collector is disabled. Docs warn it produces a larger heap and more fragmentation because it doesn't compact.
NoGCRegion, Collection suspended for a critical path, Read-only, you cannot assign it. You enter it with garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion and leave with garbage collector.EndNoGCRegion.

garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion(total Size) is the one worth knowing in detail, because every part of its contract is a trap:

It returns bool. Ignoring the return value is the bug, because a false means you are not in the region and the matching EndNoGCRegion will throw.
The single-argument overload actually commits 2 times total Size, total Size for the SOH and total Size again for the LOH. Use the (total Size, loh Size) overload if you care.
total Size (minus loh Size ) must not exceed the ephemeral segment size, or you get ArgumentOutOfRangeException.
Calls cannot nest; a second TryStartNoGCRegion while already in a region throws InvalidOperationException.
total Size must cover "allocations by the app, as well as allocations that the runtime makes on the app's behalf", which you cannot enumerate by reading your own code.
disallowFullBlockingGC: true is the genuinely clever overload, and the docs name the use case: a node calls it, reports itself ready to the load balancer if it returns true and out of rotation if it returns false, then does its full blocking collection while it isn't serving traffic.
That is a real architecture, not a micro-optimisation.

garbage collector.AddMemoryPressure / RemoveMemoryPressure solve the opposite problem: memory the garbage collector cannot see.
"The garbage collector only knows about managed memory and schedules collections based on this knowledge", so a 200-byte managed wrapper holding a 50 megabytes native buffer looks free, sits in gen 2, and holds that buffer until a gen 2 collection happens to run.
AddMemoryPressure(bytes) after the native allocation and RemoveMemoryPressure(bytes) after freeing it lets the runtime "trigger a gen2 garbage collector if deemed productive". Two caveats straight from the docs, both of which are the interview follow-up:

They "improve performance only for types that exclusively depend on finalizers to release the unmanaged resources. It's not necessary to use these methods in types that follow the dispose pattern." If your type is disposed properly, the pressure A P I buys nothing.
"You must ensure that you remove exactly the amount of pressure you add. Failing to do so can adversely affect the performance of the system in applications that run for long periods of time." An unbalanced pair is a slow-acting self-inflicted garbage collector storm.

In the real world: a trading-adjacent service wraps its order-submission path in garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion and discards the return value, because in dev it always succeeded.
In production, under load and with a larger live heap, it starts returning false, and now the finally block's unconditional garbage collector.EndNoGCRegion() throws InvalidOperationException from inside a finally, replacing a latency problem with an exception that masks the original one.
The fix is three lines: check the return value, guard the End on GCSettings.LatencyMode == GCLatencyMode.NoGCRegion, and treat false as a normal path.
The framing that generalises: TryStartNoGCRegion is a request, not a directive, the Try prefix and the bool return are the A P I saying so, and an unchecked Try* call is a review comment in any codebase.

In the real world: an image-processing service decodes with a native library that allocates its pixel buffers outside the managed heap and frees them in a finalizer. The managed heap graph is flat and boring; the container's working set climbs until the kernel kills the pod.
Nothing in the managed heap dump explains it, because nothing in the managed heap is the problem, each managed wrapper is a few hundred bytes and the garbage collector has no reason to hurry.
Adding garbage collector.AddMemoryPressure on decode and RemoveMemoryPressure on release let the runtime start scheduling gen 2 collections in proportion to the memory that actually existed.
The real fix, applied afterwards, was IDisposable plus using so lifetime stopped depending on the garbage collector at all.
Both are worth saying in an interview: pressure A P Is make the finalizer-based design survivable; disposal makes it correct.

garbage collector.Collect(), when to call it.

Almost never. The garbage collector is significantly smarter than your manual intuition about when to collect. Forcing a collection wastes C P U and disrupts the garbage collector's heuristics about heap shape. The two legitimate cases:

After a known one-time large allocation phase (for example, loading a large data set once at startup, then never again). Calling garbage collector.Collect(2, GCCollectionMode.Forced, blocking: true, compacting: true) once at the end can reclaim and compact before steady-state begins.
Benchmarking, to bring the heap to a known state between iterations.

garbage collector.Collect() in a hot path is a code smell that always loses on a benchmark.

-- pause --
Span and ReadOnlySpan.

Span is the headline allocation-killing primitive. It's a ref struct (stack-only) that represents a contiguous region of memory, without owning it. The same Span A P I can wrap:
A heap array ( new int[100].AsSpan() ).
A stack array ( stackalloc int[100] ).
Native memory (interop scenarios).
A slice of any of the ( span.Slice(10, 20) ).

ReadOnlySpan is the immutable cousin, same shape, no set indexer. string exposes a ReadOnlySpan view via s.AsSpan() and MemoryExtensions.AsSpan(s).

Why a ref struct: if Span could escape to the heap (as a class field or boxed object ), it could survive past the lifetime of the underlying memory (for example, a stackalloc whose stack frame is gone). The ref-struct constraint guarantees the span doesn't outlive its data.

Restrictions (because ref struct ):
Cannot be a field of a class or non- ref struct.
Cannot be captured by a lambda or local function.
Cannot be live across an await or a yield return. Note the version gate: through C sharp 12, declaring one anywhere in an async method or iterator was an error at all; since C sharp 13 the declaration is fine and only crossing the suspension point is rejected.
A ref struct parameter of an async method is still forbidden outright.
Cannot be boxed.
(Pre-C sharp 13) cannot be a generic argument; C sharp 13's allows ref struct constraint relaxes this.

In exchange: zero allocation, near-pointer speed, safe.

C sharp 14: implicit span conversions (the language finally knows about Span ).

Until C sharp 13, Span was an ordinary library type that the compiler had only narrow, special-cased knowledge of.
C sharp 14 adds first-class support: new implicit conversions among T[], Span, and ReadOnlySpan, which compose with other conversions, work for extension-method receivers, and participate in generic type inference.

Practically, this means the overload you wanted is now the overload you get:

Two senior-level caveats:

This is a language gate, not a BCL gate. The A P Is existed; what changed is the compiler's conversion rules. You need C sharp 14 (which ships with dot NET 10) to use them, and governs it independently of your TargetFramework.
It shifts overload resolution. When a type offers both an array-taking and a span-taking overload, C sharp 14 can now pick the span one where C sharp 13 picked the array one.
That is listed among the compiler's breaking changes for dot NET 10, and it is the kind of change that turns up as a behavioural difference in a library you don't own, not a compile error in yours.

** SearchValues, the pooling idea applied to searching (dot NET 8+)**.

span.IndexOfAny(needles) has to re-derive a search strategy from needles on every call: how many values, are they contiguous, do they fit a bitmap, can they be vectorised. SearchValues does that analysis once, at construction, and hands back an immutable object you cache in a static readonly field.

Version gates, which are separate:

SearchValues.Create(ReadOnlySpan), SearchValues.Create(ReadOnlySpan), maps to, dot NET 8.
SearchValues.Create(ReadOnlySpan, StringComparison) to SearchValues, maps to, dot NET 9, and only Ordinal or OrdinalIgnoreCase are accepted.

Usable with IndexOfAny, IndexOfAnyExcept, and ContainsAny on spans. The failure mode to name in an interview: constructing the SearchValues inside the hot method, which pays the analysis on every call and is strictly worse than the plain overload.
It belongs in a static field or it doesn't belong at all.

In the real world: a log-ingest service validates that a header value contains no control characters using a Regex compiled at startup.
Replacing it with value.AsSpan().IndexOfAnyExcept(s_allowed) >= 0 removed the regex, its match object, and its capture allocations from a path that runs on every log line.
The decision that made this worth doing wasn't the speed argument, it was that the regex was a validation predicate that returned a bool, so nothing downstream needed the match. When the answer is "yes or no", any A P I that hands you an object has already lost.

-- pause --
Memory and ReadOnlyMemory.

Span can't cross async boundaries. For async parsing / streaming where you need a memory view that can be a class field or survive an await, use Memory.

Memory is a regular struct (not ref struct), so it can be stored in a class, returned from async, et cetera To do actual work, you go through .Span to get a Span for that scope.

The pattern:
Memory for storage and async transit.
Span for synchronous processing (where you do the actual work).

-- pause --
stackalloc.

stackalloc allocates on the stack, not the heap. Lifetime is the enclosing method (the stack frame). Combined with Span, it's how you get array-like access without garbage collector pressure:

When stackalloc is safe (the four conditions, all must hold):

When stackalloc overflows:

The C L R does not check available stack before stackalloc. If your stackalloc byte[size] exceeds the remaining stack (typical thread stack: 1 megabyte on Windows, 8 megabytes on Linux), the result is immediate process termination, no StackOverflowException you can catch, no second chance.
The thread (and the whole process in modern dot NET) just dies.

The risk is real because:
A S P dot NET Core's request stack already has ~100 seconds of kilobytes consumed by the middleware pipeline.
Recursive code (for example, parsers, expression evaluators) reduces the remaining stack on each call.
stackalloc in a generic method gets duplicated per jit specialization; nested generics compound.

The safe pattern, used throughout the dot NET BCL ( Utf8JsonReader, Path, Regex ):

How the three options differ, mechanism, not multipliers.

new byte[1024], Bump the Gen 0 allocation pointer, zero the memory, write an object header. Cheap per call; the cost lands later, in collection., Consumes Gen 0 budget every call, None, it just gets slower in aggregate.
stackalloc byte[1024], Subtract from the stack pointer. No header, no garbage collector bookkeeping, reclaimed by the epilogue., None, Stack exhaustion to immediate process death.
ArrayPool.Shared.Rent(1024), Index into a bucket; take from the per-thread slot or a per-core stack; allocate only on a miss., None once warm, Forgotten Return, or use-after- Return.

The reason not to quote a nanosecond ratio here: new is cheap at the allocation site and expensive at collection time, and how expensive depends on survival rate, generation, and garbage collector flavour. A micro-benchmark of the allocation alone measures the half of the cost that doesn't matter.
Measure with [MemoryDiagnoser] and look at the Allocated column, which is the input to the cost you can't see.

stackalloc requires unmanaged element types, references would create issues for the garbage collector (which doesn't scan stack frames the same way as heap). stackalloc string[10] is a compile error.

In the real world: a parser used stackalloc byte[length] where length came from a length-prefix field in the wire protocol. It ran for two years.
It died the first time a client sent a corrupt frame, not with an exception the middleware could catch and turn into a 400, but with the process disappearing and the orchestrator restarting the pod.
The post-mortem had nothing to read, because nothing was written: a stack overflow gets no first-chance exception, no finally, no log flush. The one-line fix was the clamp-and-pool pattern.
The lesson worth carrying into an interview: stackalloc sized from untrusted input is a remote denial-of-service, not a performance question.

-- pause --
ArrayPool and MemoryPool.

For buffers too big for stackalloc (or for variable sizes), the BCL ships ArrayPool.Shared, a thread-safe pool that gives you a power-of-2-sized array and reclaims it on return.

MemoryPool gives you IMemoryOwner, a wrapper that's IDisposable, returning the memory automatically. Cleaner for using blocks:

Two things about MemoryPool.Shared that get asked as a "do you actually know this" question:
it is backed by ArrayPool.Shared, it is a convenience wrapper that trades an IMemoryOwner allocation for using -shaped lifetime management, not a second, independent pool, and like Rent, owner.Memory is at least the length you asked for.
Code that treats owner.Memory.Length as the requested length is a bug that only shows up when the bucket size differs from the request.

How ArrayPool.Shared is actually built.

Worth knowing because it explains every one of its rules. From the CoreLib source, the shared pool is a tiered cache:

Buckets by power-of-two length, starting at 16 elements. There are 27 of them, so the shared pool caches arrays up to 2³⁰ elements, far beyond ArrayPool.Create(), which is a different implementation whose defaults are 1,048,576 elements per array and 50 arrays per bucket.
Note the unit: elements, not bytes. An ArrayPool bucket of 1,048,576 is 8 megabytes.
A per-thread slot per bucket ( [ThreadStatic] ), checked first and filled last. This is why a rent or return pair on the same thread is close to free and why "the pool is slow under contention" is usually a claim about a different pool.
Per-core stacks behind that, each with its own lock, with a thread allowed to steal from another core's stack when its own is empty.
Trimming on Gen 2 collections and under memory pressure, the pool registers a gen-2 callback, timestamps idle buffers, and lets stale ones go. A pool is not a leak; a forgotten rental is.

Two consequences that read as surprises if you haven't read the source:

Rent can hand you a buffer full of arbitrary bytes. On a miss the shared pool allocates via garbage collector.AllocateUninitializedArray when T is a primitive other than bool, deliberately skipping the zero-fill, because "every bit pattern is valid" for those types.
So the contents are not merely a previous caller's data, they are whatever the operating system handed back. Always track how many bytes you wrote and slice to that.
Return validates the length and throws.
The array's length must exactly match a bucket size, or you get ArgumentException, "The buffer is not associated with this pool and may not be returned to it." So pool.Return(new byte[1000]) throws, and so does returning a buffer you sliced-and-copied into a new array.
Rent, use, return the same reference.

Rent and return, the IDisposable pattern.

ArrayPool itself doesn't expose IDisposable; the BCL idiom is try or finally with explicit Return, or use MemoryPool which wraps the rental in IMemoryOwner: IDisposable. For consistency in modern code:

When to rent / when to skip the pool.

 at most ~256 B, maps to, stackalloc (faster than rent overhead).
256 B, 4 kilobytes, maps to, stackalloc if safe, else pool.
4 kilobytes, 84,999 B, maps to, ArrayPool.Rent (sweet spot, avoids Gen 0 churn).
 at least 85,000 B, maps to, ArrayPool.Rent is essential, avoids LOH pressure.
Very rare allocation, large, maps to, Consider new once + cache as static.

The pool's rent or return path costs a bucket-index computation, a thread-static lookup, and possibly a lock, cheap, but not free, so it loses to stackalloc and to plain new for tiny one-shot buffers.
The honest framing of the break-even: pooling wins when the same code path allocates the same size often enough that the buffer stays warm in the per-thread or per-core cache.
That is a property of your traffic, not a constant, and it's the reason the sizing table is expressed in bytes rather than in calls per second, buffer size is the part you can reason about without a profiler.

Pool-cleared-on-return considerations.

Return(array, clear Array: false) is the default, fast, but the next caller sees your old data in the unused portion of the array. Three concerns:

PII leak, if you stored credit-card numbers, JWTs, passwords, or user data in the buffer, pass clear Array: true on return to zero it out (or wipe manually with Array.Clear before return).
Security audit failure, security review will flag any pool usage without explicit consideration of clearing. Add a comment in your code stating whether the buffer can hold sensitive data.
**Reference-type arrays are the case where not clearing is a leak, and nothing clears them for you. Both pool implementations in CoreLib clear only when clear Array: true is passed; there is no automatic clearing for reference element types.
So an ArrayPool or ArrayPool buffer returned with the default keeps every element it held reachable from the pool, which is a garbage collector root that lives for the life of the process.
Those objects are promoted, survive every collection, and never appear in a "who references this?" chain that mentions your code. For ArrayPool where T is a reference type, clear Array: true is the default you should adopt.**.

Diagnosing a pool that isn't pooling.

ArrayPool reports through an EventSource named System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource, which is the answer to "the pool degrades silently, how would you ever know?" It emits BufferRented, BufferAllocated, BufferReturned, and BufferDropped, and the allocate or drop events carry a reason:

BufferAllocated / Pooled, maps to, Cold start: first buffer of this size. Expected, and should stop.
BufferAllocated / PoolExhausted, maps to, Rentals outnumber returns. Either you leak rentals, or your concurrency exceeds what the pool retains.
BufferAllocated / OverMaximumSize, maps to, You are renting something bigger than the pool will cache, every call allocates.
BufferDropped / Full, maps to, Returns outnumber rentals for that size; the pool is discarding. Usually harmless.

Collect it with dotnet-trace collect --providers System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource -p. A steady stream of PoolExhausted under load is the signature of a missing Return on an exception path, and it is far faster to find this way than by staring at an allocation profile full of byte[].

In the real world: a gateway rents a buffer, writes the upstream response into it, and returns it in a finally. Under load a small number of requests start returning corrupted bodies, bytes from a different tenant's response. There is no race in the writing code.
The bug is a catch block, added months earlier for a timeout case, that returns the buffer to the pool and then lets the outer finally return it again. The array is now in the pool twice; two threads rent the same array and write to it concurrently.
This is a double-free, and Microsoft's own documentation is unusually blunt about it:
"Returning the same array reference twice or continuing to use the array reference after it has been returned is a high-severity security issue." Pooling moves a class of bug from "impossible in managed code" back onto the table, which is exactly why the null-out-before-return discipline exists.

**Pooling objects, not buffers, ObjectPool **.

ArrayPool pools arrays. When the expensive thing is an object's initialization rather than its size, the A S P dot NET Core stack ships Microsoft.Extensions.ObjectPool:

The pieces: ObjectPool ( Get / Return ), ObjectPoolProvider / DefaultObjectPoolProvider (factory, D I-registered), PooledObjectPolicy (how to create and how to reset, for types you don't control), and IResettable.TryReset() (how a type resets itself;
returning false means "I'm not in a reusable state, drop me").

Three facts the docs state that answer the usual interview follow-ups:

**The pool bounds what it retains, not what it allocates.** Under a burst, Get will happily construct new instances; the limit only governs how many are kept. So it cannot be used as a concurrency limiter.
There is no requirement to return. An un-returned object is simply garbage-collected, which makes ObjectPool strictly safer than ArrayPool on the exception path, at the cost of a silent loss of the benefit.
Disposal has defined semantics. With DefaultObjectPoolProvider and a T that implements IDisposable: items not returned to the pool get disposed, disposing the pool disposes its contents, Get after disposal throws ObjectDisposedException, and Return after disposal disposes the item.

And the guidance Microsoft leads with, which is the right note to end on: "Unless the initialization cost of an object is high, it's usually slower to get the object from the pool." Pooling a cheap object is a pure loss plus a lifetime bug waiting to happen.

Custom pool instances.

ArrayPool.Shared is one global pool per element type. If you have a hot path that needs predictable rent behavior independent of the rest of the process, you can create a dedicated pool:

Rare, the shared pool is well-tuned for most workloads. Only reach for a custom pool when profiling shows shared-pool contention or you need bounded memory.

The "never touch after return" rule.

After Return, the array may be in another thread's hands within microseconds. Any access, read or write, is a use-after-free at the managed level: you'll see torn data, corrupted state, or "impossible" race conditions. Set the rental variable to null after returning if you're unsure:

ArrayPool is what MemoryStream, Pipe, Utf8JsonReader, and many A S P dot NET internals use under the hood.

-- pause --
ValueTask versus Task, deep dive.

Task is a class (heap allocation per async invocation). ValueTask is a struct (zero allocation when the result is synchronous). The point: hot async paths that frequently complete synchronously (cached result, fast-path check) save the Task allocation entirely.

When to use ValueTask.

The method usually completes synchronously, the common case hits a cache or an early-exit and never awaits anything.
The method is on a hot path (called often enough that a per-call object matters).
The method is part of a high-throughput A P I surface like a serializer, parser, or codec.

When Task is the right choice.

General-purpose A P Is that callers may store, await multiple times, or use with Task.WhenAll.
Methods that almost always go async (DB queries, H T T P calls without a cache layer).
Public A P Is in shared libraries, Task is the conventional contract; ValueTask adds caller-side gotchas.

The four ValueTask rules (memorize, interviews probe this).

Why these rules exist: ValueTask may wrap a pooled IValueTaskSource (an internal interface used to avoid all allocations including the source Task). When you await it, the source may be reset and given to another caller. Awaiting twice reads from a reset or recycled source, corruption.

Converting between Task and ValueTask.

IAsyncEnumerable and ValueTask.

IAsyncEnumerator.MoveNextAsync() returns ValueTask. This is a deliberate choice: when iterating cached data, each MoveNext completes synchronously, and a Task allocation per element would be catastrophic. IAsyncEnumerable is the canonical example of "frequently synchronous" async patterns.

What an async method actually allocates, and why ValueTask alone doesn't fix it.

This is the follow-up that separates people who have read the lowering from people who have read a blog post. ValueTask removes the Task allocation. It does not remove the state machine allocation, and on a path that genuinely goes async, the state machine is the bigger object.

The compiler rewrites an async method into a state machine type holding every local that lives across an await. In Release builds that type is a struct, and it lives on the caller's stack, for as long as the method completes synchronously.
The moment the method actually suspends, the builder must box that struct onto the heap so it can survive the return, and it allocates the machinery to resume it.

So the allocation profile of an async method has two regimes:

Completes without ever suspending, maps to, Nothing for the state machine (struct stays on the stack). Task still allocates unless you return ValueTask.
Suspends at least once, maps to, The boxed state machine, plus the returned object.

Consequences that are worth saying in an interview:

async on a method with no await on the hot path is not free-but-wasteful, it is genuinely free, which is why the "fast path" idiom exists: a non- async outer method that checks the cache and returns new ValueTask(value), delegating to a private async method only when it must actually wait.
Every local you keep alive across an await widens the state machine, and therefore the box. Large structs, several Span -shaped buffers turned into arrays "because Span can't cross await", these all land in one heap object with a Gen 0 lifetime that is as long as the I O.
ConfigureAwait(false) is not an allocation optimization. It changes capture of the synchronization context. People conflate the two constantly.

For the rare case where a hot async method suspends on most calls and you still want the state machine pooled, dot NET 6 added an opt-in builder:

PoolingAsyncValueTaskMethodBuilder / PoolingAsyncValueTaskMethodBuilder (both System.Runtime.CompilerServices, dot NET 6+) reuse the state-machine object instead of allocating one per suspension.
The catch is that it makes the ValueTask rules load-bearing rather than advisory, the returned ValueTask is now backed by a pooled, single-use source, so awaiting twice is no longer "may misbehave", it is reading from an object someone else owns. Reach for it only with a measurement in hand.

In the real world: a repository method is changed from Task to ValueTask across a codebase because "ValueTask is faster".
Allocation per request barely moves, the method hits the database on almost every call, so the state machine box and the IValueTaskSource were always the cost, and the Task object was noise.
What does change is that a caller who was doing var t = repo.GetAsync(id); await Log(t); return await t; now has undefined behaviour. The team traded a real correctness hazard for a benefit they never measured.
ValueTask earns its keep on the cache-hit shape; applying it uniformly is cargo cult with sharp edges.

-- pause --
Defensive copy trap with structs.

When you pass a struct by value, the runtime copies it. When you pass it by reference with in (or ref readonly ), the runtime can pass a pointer, unless it isn't sure the struct can't mutate itself, in which case it makes a hidden defensive copy. This is the defensive copy trap.

Setup.

What happens.

When Use(in BigPoint p) calls p.Magnitude(), the compiler doesn't know whether Magnitude() might mutate this. To preserve the in contract ("caller's variable doesn't change"), the compiler copies p to a hidden local, then calls Magnitude() on the copy.
For a 64-byte struct in a hot loop, this defensive copy is real cost.

For BigPointRO, the readonly keyword on the struct promises that Magnitude() cannot mutate this, so the compiler skips the copy.

Detection: two Roslyn IDE analyzers cover the two granularities, IDE0250 ("Make struct readonly ") for the whole type and IDE0251 ("Make member readonly ") for individual members you can't make the whole type immutable for.
Also visible in I L: look for a dup / stloc / ldloca sequence right before the method call.

Practical impact.

State the mechanism, not a multiplier. Each defensive copy is a memcpy of sizeof(T) bytes plus a stack slot to hold the copy.
The cost therefore scales with the struct's size and with how many times per iteration you touch it, and every property read is a separate copy, so a loop body that reads four properties pays four copies, not one.
It also blocks optimizations rather than merely adding work: a hidden copy in the loop body is an aliasing wall the jit has to respect, so hoisting and vectorization stop.

The reason this is worth an interview answer at all is the shape of the fix: it is a keyword, applied to a type declaration, with no call-site changes and no behavioural change. There are very few of those.

Properties that cause defensive copies on a non-readonly struct:

Calling any non- readonly instance method.
Reading any property (properties are method calls).
Passing the struct to another in parameter.
Calling interface methods (even if the struct implements the interface, boxes too).

The fixes (in priority order):

Make the struct readonly struct, eliminates all defensive copies for instance method calls.
If full readonly is impossible, mark individual members readonly: public readonly double Magnitude() goes to.; (C sharp 8+). The method promises it won't mutate this.
Use ref readonly returns and parameters consistently for large structs.
For large structs, question whether it should be a struct at all.
Microsoft's framework design guidelines put the boundary at "an instance size under 16 bytes", that, and absent the immutability and short-lifetime conditions the guideline also lists, the copies start costing more than the one heap allocation a class would have paid.

readonly struct guarantees:

In the real world: a pricing engine models money as struct Money { decimal Amount; string Currency; }, not readonly, because someone needed to fix up the currency once, years ago. The valuation loop iterates a Money[] and reads .Amount and .Currency through an in parameter.
Every read copies the whole struct, because a plain struct 's property getter might mutate this and the compiler has to assume it does. Nobody wrote a copy; the copies are in the codegen.
The fix was readonly struct plus making the one mutation return a new value, a two-line change that nothing else in the codebase noticed. The reason to remember this case: the smell was not "this is slow", it was a mutable struct that is treated as a value everywhere it is used.
That mismatch is what generates the copies, and you can see it in review without a profiler.

In the real world: the mirror-image failure. A team hears "structs avoid allocation" and converts a 200-byte DTO from class to struct. Allocation goes down; throughput goes down with it.
The object was being passed through six layers, stored in a List, and returned from an interface method, so every hop copied 200 bytes, the List indexer returned copies that mutations were silently applied to and lost, and the interface call boxed it right back onto the heap.
struct is not "class without allocation"; it is a different assignment semantics that happens to avoid allocation. If the type is passed around rather than computed with, the copies find you.

In the real world: mutable structs in collections produce a bug the compiler catches in the obvious shapes and misses in the one people actually write.
dict[key].Count++ and mutating a foreach variable both fail to compile, the first because you can't modify the return value of an indexer, the second because a foreach iteration variable is read-only. So the developer does the thing the compiler accepts: var v = dict[key]; v.Count++;.
That copies, increments the copy, and discards it. Clean build, passing type checker, silently wrong. The durable rule: if a struct is mutable and lives in a collection, every read gives you a copy, and "it compiled" tells you nothing.
Make it a readonly struct and mutate by replacement, or reach for CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef to get a genuine reference to the slot.

-- pause --
ref returns and ref locals.

C sharp 7 added the ability to return and store references (not copies) to struct fields and array elements. The win: avoid copying large structs and avoid re-lookups in collections.

Rules:

The reference must not outlive the underlying storage (compiler-enforced via lifetime tracking).
ref locals can only be initialized to ref -returned values or ref parameters.
Cannot store a ref in a heap field; can't cross await.
ref readonly returns prevent mutation through the reference (for example, MemoryMarshal.GetReference ).

The killer feature, CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef (dot NET 6+):

Dictionary normally requires two lookups for a "find-and-update" pattern: one TryGetValue, one Add or dict[key] =.. With GetValueRefOrNullRef, you do one lookup and mutate in place:

What you save is one hash computation and one bucket probe per update, plus, for a large TValue struct, the copy out and the copy back in. The second saving is the one that grows with your type; the first is fixed.

For the "add if missing" half of the pattern there is a companion that removes the second lookup too:

Similar utilities (each has its own version gate):

CollectionsMarshal.AsSpan(List), dot NET 5, Span over the list's backing array, indexer-free, bounds-check-hoisted loops.
CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef(dict, key), dot NET 6, ref TValue to the bucket, or a null ref.
CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrAddDefault(dict, key, out bool), dot NET 6, Same, inserting when absent.
CollectionsMarshal.SetCount(List, int), dot NET 8, Set Count directly, then fill via AsSpan, skips Add 's per-element work.
MemoryMarshal.GetReference(span), dot NET Core 2.1, ref T to span[0] for low-level loops.
Unsafe.Add(ref T, int), dot NET Core 2.1, Pointer arithmetic on managed references.

The safety contract you are opting out of.

Everything in CollectionsMarshal lives in System.Runtime.InteropServices for a reason: the returned reference is only valid until the collection changes shape.
Any Add, Remove, Clear, or resize can reallocate the backing array, at which point your ref points at an array the garbage collector is free to collect, you are writing into a detached object, and nothing throws.
SetCount is sharper still: it can expose uninitialized elements if you grow the list and read before writing. The rule to state: acquire the ref, use it, drop it, and do not touch the collection in between.

scoped and ref safety (C sharp 11+).

The compiler tracks a ref-safe-to-escape lifetime for every ref and ref struct, and it errs toward assuming a parameter's reference could escape through the return value. Two keywords let you correct it in each direction:

scoped is the one you will actually write, and usually because the compiler asked for it: you took a ref struct parameter, returned something derived from it, and got a lifetime error you didn't understand.
C sharp 14 additionally allows scoped, ref, in, out, and ref readonly on implicitly typed lambda parameters, so these modifiers no longer force you to spell out every lambda parameter type.

When to reach for ref:

Hot loops mutating dictionary values, list elements, or array slots, ref saves the re-lookup.
Passing large structs through method chains, avoid copies.
Building span-based algorithms that need to write into the underlying memory.

For ordinary application code, ref returns are overkill. They earn their keep in framework code, parsers, serializers, math libraries.

In the real world: a metrics aggregator counts events into a Dictionary where Counter is a struct with several fields. The original code did TryGetValue, mutated the local copy, then wrote it back with dict[key] = c, three hash lookups and two full struct copies per event.
Rewritten with GetValueRefOrAddDefault, it became one lookup and an in-place update. The part worth remembering is what made it safe: the aggregator holds a lock over the whole update, so no other thread can resize the dictionary while the ref is live.
Take that lock away and the same code is a use-after-free with no exception to point at it. ref into a collection buys speed by borrowing a guarantee the collection wasn't offering.

-- pause --
IDisposable and IAsyncDisposable, the full pattern.

IDisposable is the dot NET convention for deterministic resource cleanup, files, sockets, DB connections, native handles, locks. The runtime's finalizer is non-deterministic (runs whenever the garbage collector feels like it); IDisposable lets callers say "I'm done with this resource right now".

The basic case, managed resources only (most code):

No finalizer. The class owns only managed resources (other IDisposable instances). If the caller forgets Dispose, the garbage collector eventually collects everything; the finalizer in HttpClient (et cetera) handles the cleanup.
Adding a finalizer here would be wrong, it adds garbage collector overhead and never runs in normal flow.

The full pattern, managed + unmanaged resources:

When your class directly owns an unmanaged resource (raw IntPtr to a native handle, Marshal.AllocHGlobal memory, a SafeHandle -less interop pointer), you need the full Dispose pattern with a finalizer as the safety net.

Why the disposing flag:

Dispose() to calls Dispose(true) to can touch other managed objects (they're guaranteed alive because the caller has a reference to this ).
Finalizer to calls Dispose(false) to must not touch managed objects, because they may have already been finalized (finalizer order is undefined). Only release unmanaged.

garbage collector.SuppressFinalize(this): marks the object as finalization-complete so the garbage collector skips the finalizer queue when reclaiming. Without it, the object survives one extra garbage collector cycle (sits in the f-reachable queue), wasting performance.

Modern alternative, SafeHandle: the BCL's SafeHandle (and its subclasses) wraps unmanaged handles with a built-in finalizer. You hold a SafeHandle field instead of IntPtr, and you don't need your own finalizer:

In 2026 code, prefer SafeHandle over IntPtr + custom finalizer. The full Dispose pattern with finalizer is now rarely needed in application code.

When you can skip the finalizer entirely:

Class owns only managed IDisposable resources (no raw unmanaged handles).
Class owns a SafeHandle (which has its own finalizer).
Class is sealed and the unmanaged resource lifecycle is otherwise guaranteed.

Adding a finalizer "just in case" is a measurable perf cost, every instance enters the finalization queue, survives an extra garbage collector, and serializes finalizer execution on the single finalizer thread. Don't add finalizers without a unique unmanaged resource to release.

IAsyncDisposable and await using (C sharp 8+):

Some resources need asynchronous cleanup, flushing a network buffer, closing a sequel connection cleanly, draining a channel. Sync Dispose() would block the thread.

When IAsyncDisposable over IDisposable:

The cleanup itself does I O (flush, drain, network close), sync Dispose would block.
The class is async-first (streams, DB connections, hosted services).
The caller is already in an async context, await using is natural.

Implement both when you can: IDisposable for sync callers, IAsyncDisposable for async callers. The BCL convention: DisposeAsync() does the real work; Dispose() calls DisposeAsync().AsTask().GetAwaiter().GetResult() or duplicates the logic synchronously.

A S P dot NET Core, E F Core, and HttpClient all follow this dual pattern.

In the real world: a wrapper class gets a finalizer added "for safety" during a code review, because the reviewer remembered the Dispose pattern from a book. The class owns only a FileStream.
Nothing breaks, and the cost is invisible for a year: every instance is registered on the finalization queue at construction, survives at least one extra collection, and gets promoted; the single finalizer thread serialises the work.
It surfaces during an incident as an unexplained Gen 1 population and a growing finalization queue in !finalizequeue. The rule that would have prevented it: a finalizer is for a resource nothing else will release, a raw handle you own. Owning another IDisposable is not that.
GCMemoryInfo.FinalizationPendingCount is how you see this from inside the process.

In the real world: a hosted service implements IAsyncDisposable only, and a caller in a synchronous startup path writes using var svc =., which doesn't compile, so they write svc.DisposeAsync().AsTask().Wait() instead and move on.
Under load, on a runtime with a saturated thread pool, that Wait() occupies a pool thread while the continuation it is waiting for needs a pool thread to run. The shutdown hangs.
await using is not sugar for using; the compile error that pushed the caller into sync-over-async was the design working as intended, and the right response was to make the caller async, not to defeat the check.

-- pause --
Allocation-free string building.

Strings are immutable; every operation that "modifies" a string actually allocates a new one. On hot paths (logging, formatting, CSV or Jason building), string allocations dominate. The BCL has five tools, in increasing sophistication.

The hierarchy, string.Concat versus StringBuilder versus string.Create versus interpolation handler versus UTF-8 literal.

a + b + c in one expression, 1 (the result), Few parts, all known, Roslyn folds the whole expression into a single string.Concat, there are no intermediates. See.
a += b repeated, 1 per +=, total bytes O(N²), Never, in a loop, Each statement is a separate Concat over the whole accumulated string.
string.Concat(a, b, c), 1 (just the result), Known small list of strings, Pre-counts total length, single alloc.
StringBuilder, One char[] chunk per growth + the final ToString, Many parts ( at least 4), variable count, conditional, Chunks are linked, never recopied on growth, see.
string.Create(len, state, span goes to.), 1 (the result, length known), You can compute total length ahead, Writes into the string's final char buffer.
$"." interpolation (C sharp 10+), 1 (the result); the scratch buffer is pooled, Formatting values into a string at all, Lowers to DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler, which rents from ArrayPool.Shared and returns it in ToStringAndClear(). Not free when the result is discarded, see the ILogger note.
Utf8.TryWrite(span, $".") / MemoryExtensions.TryWrite, 0, The destination is a caller-owned buffer, The handler writes straight into your Span / Span; no string is ever created.
"text"u8 UTF-8 literal, 0, Byte sequences known at compile time, Bytes baked into assembly metadata.

What the + operator actually compiles to.

Worth getting right, because the folklore version (" + allocates an intermediate per operator") is wrong and an interviewer may be checking.
Roslyn lowers a whole concatenation expression into one string.Concat call: a + b + c + d becomes string.Concat(a, b, c, d), which pre-counts the total length and allocates the result exactly once. Two refinements that follow from the Roslyn implementation:

Value types are not boxed. Roslyn does not emit the object -taking Concat overloads; it calls ToString() on value-type operands (and ?.ToString() on reference types) and then uses the string -taking overloads.
So "id=" + order Id where order Id is an int allocates the int 's string and the result, not a box. This is a compiler optimisation, not a language rule, check the I L if it matters.
Beyond four operands there is no fixed overload, so the compiler falls back to the params form and you pay for the array as well. The four-string overload exists precisely so the common case avoids it.

The quadratic behaviour has nothing to do with the operator and everything to do with statement boundaries: result += x in a loop is N separate Concat calls, each over the entire accumulated string.

The trap: += in a hot loop.

The reason: each result += x allocates a new string of the whole accumulated length and copies the old contents into it. So the allocation count is O(N) but the bytes copied and allocated are O(N²), iteration i copies everything the first i−1 iterations produced.
Two derived consequences you can state without needing a benchmark:

The intermediate strings cross the LOH threshold long before the final one does. With UTF-16, 85,000 bytes is about 42,500 characters, so from that point on, every single iteration produces a large object and a direct contribution to Gen 2.
The peak is not the final string's size, it is roughly the last two intermediates alive at once, which is why the memory graph shows a sawtooth rather than a ramp.

Fix #1: StringBuilder.

What StringBuilder actually is, worth getting right, because the usual description is wrong. It is not a single char[] that doubles and copies.
In CoreLib, a StringBuilder is a linked list of chunks: fields m_ChunkChars (the current buffer), m_ChunkPrevious (the previous chunk), m_ChunkOffset, m_ChunkLength.
When the current chunk fills, ExpandByABlock allocates a new chunk and relinks, the source comment reads "Move all of the data from this chunk to a new one, via a few O(1) reference adjustments." Existing characters are never recopied on growth.

Two constants from that source explain the behaviour you observe:

DefaultCapacity = 16, a new StringBuilder() starts at 16 chars.
MaxChunkSize = 8000, new chunks are sized max(needed, min(current Length, 8000)).
The cap is deliberate; the comment says it exists "so we stay in the small object heap, and never allocate really big chunks even if the string gets really big." 8,000 chars is 16,000 bytes, comfortably the 85,000-byte LOH threshold.
StringBuilder is engineered to keep its own buffers out of the LOH, the final string it produces is still a single allocation and can absolutely land there.

So pre-sizing ( new StringBuilder(estimated Size) ) doesn't avoid "doubling churn"; it avoids allocating a chain of chunks, and it means ToString() copies from one buffer instead of walking a list.
Note that a capacity you pass to the constructor is honoured directly, the 8,000-char cap applies to growth chunks, not to the initial one, so new StringBuilder(200_000) really does allocate one large-object buffer.

Fix #2: string.Create when length is known.

string.Create gives you a Span over the new string's internal buffer before the string is frozen as immutable. You write into it, then return. One allocation total. Beats StringBuilder when you can compute the length ahead of time.

Fix #3: Span + stackalloc for tiny strings.

Fix #4: UTF-8 literals (C sharp 11+).

When you're writing to a stream or socket that takes bytes, skip the UTF-16-to-UTF-8 conversion entirely:

DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler (C sharp 10):

The compiler converts $"x = {n}" into a handler struct, a local, so it lives on the stack, plus a sequence of AppendLiteral / AppendFormatted calls. The handler's scratch buffer is rented from ArrayPool.Shared and returned in ToStringAndClear(), so the only lasting allocation is the result string.
AppendFormatted(T value) is generic and jit-specialised, so value-type holes are not boxed, which is the concrete improvement over string.Format, whose parameters are typed object and therefore box every value-type argument.
(The boxes are the cost; string.Format does not allocate an object[] on top, it has non- params overloads for one, two, and three arguments and a params ReadOnlySpan overload beyond that.)

Which A P Is actually take a handler, and the one that famously does not.

The point of [InterpolatedStringHandlerAttribute] is that a method can accept the pieces of an interpolated string and decide, before formatting, whether to do the work at all. In the BCL that hook is used by:

StringBuilder.Append / AppendLine, StringBuilder.AppendInterpolatedStringHandler, dot NET 6, appends straight into the builder's chunk, no intermediate string.
MemoryExtensions.TryWrite(Span,.), TryWriteInterpolatedStringHandler, dot NET 6, formats into a buffer you own; returns false instead of throwing if it doesn't fit.
Utf8.TryWrite(Span,.), Utf8.TryWriteInterpolatedStringHandler, dot NET 8, same, straight to UTF-8 bytes.

Microsoft.Extensions.Logging is not on that list, and this is the single most repeated piece of wrong advice in this area. _logger.LogInformation($"Request {id} took {milliseconds}milliseconds") binds the interpolated string to the ordinary string message parameter.
The string is therefore built, allocated, and passed even when the level is disabled, the logger cannot short-circuit something that has already been evaluated.
The A P I proposal to add interpolated-string-handler overloads to the ILogger extension methods (dotnet or runtime #111283) was closed as not planned, and its own problem statement is the fact worth quoting:
"all of the expense associated with generating the messages are incurred even if it's then immediately thrown away".

There is a second, larger cost: interpolation destroys the message template, so the structured fields ( OrderId, Ms ) never reach the sink and the log line becomes an unqueryable string. The analyzer CA2254 ("the logging message template should not vary between calls") exists to catch exactly this.

So the two correct forms are:

Custom handlers ( [InterpolatedStringHandler] ) let libraries build the short-circuiting pattern, that is how a logging façade could offer it, and some third-party libraries do. It is not something ILogger gives you for free.

In the real world: a team reads about C sharp 10 interpolated string handlers and does a codebase-wide sweep replacing _logger.LogDebug("Processing {Id}", id) with _logger.LogDebug($"Processing {id}"), on the understanding that the handler will skip the work when Debug is off.
It doesn't, because ILogger has no handler overload, so they added a string allocation per call on a disabled level, and simultaneously lost every structured field in their log queries. The regression showed up as a step change in allocation rate on a release whose diff contained no new features.
The two things to take away: an optimisation that depends on an overload you haven't verified exists is a guess, and the CA2254 analyzer would have flagged all of it at build time for the price of turning it on.

StringBuilder, still relevant for many sequential appends with unknown length: it allocates chunk buffers rather than a fresh full-length string per append.
Modern code prefers string.Create when length is known, falling back to StringBuilder for variable-length building, and skips the string entirely when the destination is bytes, using Utf8.TryWrite (dot NET 8+) into a pooled or stack buffer.

The interface that makes all of this composable: TryFormat.

Every one of the zero-allocation paths needs the leaf values, an int, a Guid, a DateTime, a decimal, to be formattable directly into a span, or the whole chain collapses back into intermediate strings. Two interfaces provide that, and knowing which is which is a good version-gating question:

ISpanFormattable, bool TryFormat(Span destination, out int chars Written, ReadOnlySpan format, IFormatProvider? provider), dot NET 6, implemented across the primitives, Guid, DateTime, TimeSpan, decimal, the numeric types.
IUtf8SpanFormattable, bool TryFormat(Span utf8Destination, out int bytes Written,.), dot NET 8, the same idea straight to UTF-8, skipping UTF-16 entirely.

Their parsing counterparts are ISpanParsable / IUtf8SpanParsable (dot NET 7 / dot NET 8). The practical shape: int.TryFormat(buffer, out int written) writes digits into your buffer and allocates nothing, where n.ToString() allocates a string you are about to copy and discard.
When you see Utf8JsonWriter or a logging source generator produce no allocations for a numeric field, this is the mechanism underneath, and it is also why implementing ISpanFormattable (not just ToString ) on your own value types is what lets callers stay allocation-free.

In the real world: the classic "an A P I that allocated its way into garbage collector pressure" is not a parser or a serializer, it is logging. A service logs one structured line per request with _logger.LogInformation("Order {OrderId} for {Customer} completed in {Ms}milliseconds",.).
That is the correct, allocation-aware form. Then someone adds a debug line inside the per-item loop: _logger.LogDebug("Processing " + item.Id + " of " + order.Id);, string concatenation, evaluated before the logger is called, so the filter never gets a chance to suppress it.
Debug is disabled in production, so the string is built, passed, and thrown away, millions of times an hour. Allocation profile: System.String, most of the bytes, attributed to a line that produces no output.
The fix is the message-template overload, _logger.LogDebug("Processing {ItemId} of {OrderId}", item.Id, order.Id), or better, a [LoggerMessage] source-generated method.
Note what is not a fix: switching the concatenation to $"Processing {item.Id}", because ILogger has no interpolated-string-handler overload and the string is built either way.
The transferable point: the cost of a log statement is paid at the call site, not at the sink, and every argument you build eagerly is paid whether or not anyone is listening.

In the real world: a CSV export built with string.Join(",", row) per row looked fine in review and profiled badly, because string.Join over an IEnumerable allocates an enumerator, an internal StringBuilder, and the joined string, per row, before the writer then copies it again into its own buffer.
Writing the fields straight into the TextWriter removed three of the four allocations and made the row length irrelevant. The general shape: a convenience method that returns a string you immediately hand to something that writes bytes is a materialization you didn't need.

-- pause --
Boxing checklist, when value types secretly allocate.

Boxing is the runtime wrapping a value type in a heap object so it can be referenced through object or an interface.
The size follows from object layout rather than from a benchmark:
on 64-bit, every heap object carries an 8-byte object header and an 8-byte method-table pointer before its fields, and the result is rounded up to the allocation granularity, so a boxed int is a 24-byte object holding 4 bytes of payload.
Boxing therefore costs an allocation, a copy of the struct's contents, and a permanent 16-byte-plus-padding overhead per value. In hot paths, boxing is one of the top three allocation sources after string operations and closures.

The complete list of when boxing happens:

The struct-enumerator case deserves its own paragraph, because it is the one that hides behind good design. List, Dictionary, HashSet, Queue, ImmutableArray and Span all expose a public struct Enumerator, and foreach binds to it by pattern-matching GetEnumerator() on the static type.
Typing the variable, field, or parameter as IEnumerable throws that away: the interface implementation returns IEnumerator, which boxes the struct.

This puts a genuine tension on the table, and being able to name both sides is the senior answer:

Accepting IEnumerable is the better A P I, it is what "depend on abstractions" means, and it is what makes the method testable and composable.
Accepting List or ReadOnlySpan is the faster implementation on a hot path.

The resolution is not "always use the concrete type". It is: expose IEnumerable at the boundary, and use the concrete type inside the loop that runs a million times, the same file, sometimes the same method.
Note that dot NET 10 narrowed the gap for one common case specifically: the jit can now devirtualize and inline array interface methods, so foreach over an int[] typed as IEnumerable no longer blocks the optimizations it used to.
That is arrays, not List, and it is a jit optimization rather than a language guarantee.

How to detect boxing in your code:

Roslyn analyzer HAA0601 (Heap Allocation Analyzer / ClrHeapAllocationAnalyzer), flags suspected boxing at compile time. The package isn't on by default, install ClrHeapAllocationAnalyzer or Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.BannedApiAnalyzers.

I L inspection, boxing appears as the box I L opcode. Use ILSpy or dotnet-ildasm and search for box:

BenchmarkDotNet [MemoryDiagnoser], measures bytes allocated per call. If a method that takes a struct allocates more than expected (for example, 24 B for what should be 0), there's a hidden box.

PerfView / dot Memory allocation traces, show System.Int32 (or whatever struct) in the allocation report. Value types in an allocation profile = boxing.

The fixes:

IComparable c = my Struct, maps to, Use generic constraint: void M(T x) where T: IComparable.
object Log(object x) taking structs, maps to, Use generic method Log(T x) and call x.ToString() via constrained or direct call.
ArrayList / Hashtable, maps to, Use List / Dictionary.
Struct calling ToString() from object, maps to, Override ToString() on the struct.
Struct calling interface method via interface, maps to, Call directly on the struct, or use generic constraint.
Enum passed to an object parameter ( string.Format("{0}", e), Console.WriteLine(e) ), maps to, Enum.GetName(e) (dot NET 5+, generic, no box), or $"{e}", whose AppendFormatted is generic.
e.ToString() on an enum, maps to, Unavoidable in I L: ToString is inherited from System.Enum (a class) and enums don't override it, so the receiver is boxed. On dot NET 9+ the jit may stack-allocate that box when it provably doesn't escape, an optimisation, not a guarantee.

The subtle one, generic methods.

The constraint where T: IFoo doesn't prevent boxing to object, it only prevents boxing when calling x.DoFoo(). The jit specializes the method per concrete value-type T, so the constrained call site emits a direct method call instead of a virtual interface call.

-- pause --
Data locality: object layout, padding, and cache lines.

Everything up to here has been about how many allocations. This section is about the other half of memory performance, which is how the bytes are arranged, and it is the half that a candidate who has only read blog posts about Span cannot discuss.
A loop that allocates nothing can still be dominated by cache misses.

Where the overhead comes from.

On 64-bit CoreCLR, a heap object is laid out as an object header slot (8 bytes, immediately before the object reference; the sync-block index occupies 4 of them), then a method table pointer (8 bytes, at offset 0, this is what the reference actually points at), then the fields.
CoreCLR's object.h defines a minimum object size of 24 bytes on x64, which is why an instance of a class with no fields at all still costs 24 bytes, and why the boxed int in the boxing section is a 24-byte object wrapping 4 bytes of payload.
An array carries the same header plus its length, so a byte[1] is nowhere near one byte.

Struct fields inside a class or an array pay none of this, no header, no method table pointer, no per-element indirection. That is the entire structural argument for struct over class in bulk data, and it is a different argument from "avoids allocation".

Three different answers to "how big is it".

Confusing the second and third is a classic: Marshal.SizeOf is not "the size of the struct", it is "the size of the struct as the interop marshaller will build it".

Layout and padding are decisions the compiler makes for you, differently for structs and classes.

Microsoft's StructLayoutAttribute documentation is explicit: the C sharp, Visual Basic and C plus plus compilers apply LayoutKind.Sequential to structs by default, while classes default to LayoutKind.Auto, which lets the runtime reorder fields to minimise padding.
So the field order you type matters for a struct and generally does not for a class.
One important qualifier from the same docs:
for non-blittable types, Sequential "controls the layout when the class or structure is marshaled to unmanaged code, but does not control the layout in managed memory", so a struct containing a string is not guaranteed to be laid out in declaration order in the managed heap either.

Alignment then does the damage. Work the arithmetic rather than memorising a number:

Confirm with Unsafe.SizeOf() rather than trusting the derivation, that is the point of having the A P I. The reason it matters: Wasteful and Tidy hold identical data and differ by 8 bytes per instance, so an array of a million of them differs by 8 megabytes, which is a third of the array.
You pay for that twice, once in footprint and once in memory bandwidth on every pass over it.

Pointer chasing: the difference between an array of structs and an array of classes.

This is why the write-barrier point earlier said arrays of structs win twice over.
There is in fact a third win, specific to reference-typed arrays:
because array covariance makes string[] assignable to object[], the C L R must type-check every reference store into an array, that is where ArrayTypeMismatchException comes from, and the check is paid on stores that succeed as well as the ones that throw.
The jit elides it in the cases it can prove safe (storing null, or storing an element read from the same array), but in the general case a store into a T[] of reference type costs a covariance check plus a write barrier, where a store into a struct array costs neither.

False sharing, when two threads that share nothing still contend.

Caches are coherent at the granularity of a cache line, not a variable. If thread A writes counters[0] and thread B writes counters[1] and both live on the same line, every write invalidates the other core's copy of that line and it ping-pongs between them.
Neither thread shares data with the other; they share a line. There is no correctness bug and no lock, so nothing in the code looks wrong, throughput just fails to scale as you add threads, which is the opposite of the symptom people go looking for.

CoreLib takes this seriously enough to have a constant for it. Internal.PaddingHelpers.CACHE_LINE_SIZE is 64, and 128 on ARM64, and ConcurrentQueue 's segment uses it to force the head and tail counters onto separate lines:

Padding before, between, and after, because the neighbours on either side matter too. Note what this tells you about when to reach for it: the BCL applies padding to the two hottest concurrently-written fields in a lock-free queue, and essentially nowhere else.
The cheaper fix, and the one to try first in application code, is not to share the line at all: accumulate into a local and publish once at the end, or give each worker its own object rather than its own slot in a shared array.

In the real world: an ingestion pipeline keeps per-worker statistics in a long[] counts indexed by worker id and increments with Interlocked.Increment(ref counts[i]). It scales beautifully to two workers and stops scaling at four; at eight, adding workers makes total throughput worse.
There is no lock, no shared state, and no bug, eight long s is 64 bytes, so all eight counters sit on one or two cache lines and every increment invalidates every other core's copy.
The fix that shipped was not padding: each worker accumulated into a plain local long and did one Interlocked.Add at the end of its batch, which removed the contention and the atomic operation from the hot loop together.
The interesting part for an interview is the diagnosis, because "throughput goes down as I add cores, with no lock in the picture" has a very short list of causes and false sharing is at the top of it.

In the real world: a telemetry aggregator holds an hour of samples as List where Sample is a class with four numeric fields. The aggregation pass is a simple loop with no allocation at all, and it is slow in a way that no allocation profiler explains.
The heap holds a million small objects, each with 16 bytes of header, each at whatever address the allocator handed out an hour ago and each reached through a separate dereference, the loop is bound by memory latency, not arithmetic.
Converting Sample to a readonly record struct and the container to a Sample[] made the pass one sequential scan over one contiguous block, removed the per-object headers, and removed the write barrier from every store.
The decision was safe because of the properties the type already had: small, immutable, value-like, and never used polymorphically.
Convert to a struct for locality, not for allocation, and only when those four conditions hold, or you get the copy problems described in the defensive-copy section instead.

-- pause --
unsafe and pointers.

unsafe blocks let you use C-style pointers ( int*, byte* ), pin garbage collector objects ( fixed ), and do pointer arithmetic.
With Span and MemoryMarshal covering the patterns that used to require it, unsafe is rarely the right tool anymore, but knowing it exists matters for interop and BCL reading.

Requires true in the .csproj.

When unsafe is genuinely needed:
Native interop (P or Invoke) where the A P I requires pointers.
Bit-twiddling that MemoryMarshal doesn't cover.
Performance-critical code beating Span (very rare; usually only relevant for SIMD via Vector or low-level math kernels).

For most code: prefer Span + MemoryMarshal (which exposes safe equivalents to many pointer operations, for example, MemoryMarshal.AsBytes(span) ).

-- pause --
Sizing decisions: when each tool wins.

Parsing a fixed-size header, stackalloc Span,.
Streaming bytes from a network, ArrayPool + Memory, Span for sync work.
Building a string from many parts, string.Create if you know the length, else StringBuilder,.
Slicing a string for parsing, s.AsSpan() + ReadOnlySpan,.
Jason serialization, JsonSerializerContext (source-gen),.
Logging, source-generated [LoggerMessage],.
Regex compilation, [GeneratedRegex] (C sharp 11+), Regex with Compiled flag.
Native interop, unsafe + fixed (or Marshal ),.
Cross- await buffer, Memory, sync Span between awaits.
Generic value-type math, where T: INumber,.
Hot-loop without garbage collector, record struct / readonly struct, Span if applicable.
Scanning for the same character or byte set repeatedly, static readonly SearchValues (dot NET 8+), plain IndexOfAny if the set varies.
Reusing an object that is expensive to initialise, ObjectPool + IResettable, ArrayPool if the cost is just the buffer.
Counting or accumulating into a dictionary, CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrAddDefault (dot NET 6+), TryGetValue + assign.
Big MemoryStream buffers churning the LOH, Stream to the destination; else pooled buffers, RecyclableMemoryStream ( Microsoft.IO.RecyclableMemoryStream ).
Filling a collection whose final size you know, new List(capacity) / EnsureCapacity(n), CollectionsMarshal.SetCount + AsSpan (dot NET 8).
Attaching state to objects you don't own, ConditionalWeakTable, WeakReference if the value is the cache.
A cache that must not root its entries forever, MemoryCache with a size limit and eviction, WeakReference for large, recreatable values.
Counters written concurrently by many threads, Accumulate in a local, publish once, Cache-line padding only if the shared write is unavoidable.
Formatting your own value type into someone's buffer, Implement ISpanFormattable (dot NET 6), IUtf8SpanFormattable (dot NET 8) if the sink is bytes.
A latency-critical window you must not be paused in, garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion, check the return value, GCSettings.LatencyMode = SustainedLowLatency for longer windows.
A managed wrapper over a large native buffer, IDisposable + using, garbage collector.AddMemoryPressure / RemoveMemoryPressure if only a finalizer exists.

-- pause --
Measurement: BenchmarkDotNet.

All allocation talk is theoretical until measured. BenchmarkDotNet (NuGet: BenchmarkDotNet ) is the canonical micro-benchmarking tool. It builds a Release-mode assembly, warms it up, then measures with statistical rigor (mean + median + standard deviation + outlier detection).

The core attributes:

Reading the output, the shape of the report, not numbers to memorise (yours will differ by machine, runtime and N):

Read it in this order, which is not left to right:

Allocated first. It is the most stable column across machines and the one that predicts production behaviour. If a method you believe is allocation-free reports a non-zero value, stop and find the box or the closure before looking at time at all.
Error / StdDev next. If the intervals of two rows overlap, the ordering between them is not a result.
Mean and Ratio last, and only relative to the baseline within the same run.

Mean, average time per call.
Allocated, bytes allocated per call (the headline number [MemoryDiagnoser] adds).
Ratio, relative to the baseline ( Baseline = true ).
Gen 0 or 1 or 2, collections per 1000 ops (also added by [MemoryDiagnoser] ).

What the Allocated column is, and the three things it cannot see.

This is the part that turns a benchmark from evidence into a decision, and it comes straight from how the diagnoser is built.
BenchmarkDotNet measures allocation with garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread, runs a separate iteration set when any diagnoser is attached (so the tracking overhead doesn't contaminate the timing run),
and its own documentation puts the accuracy at "99.5%. when using default settings or Job.ShortRun (or any longer job than it)".
Three consequences:

It counts the benchmark thread only. A method that offloads its work with Task.Run, or that hands a callback to a thread-pool thread, reports the allocations of the dispatch, not of the work.
A "0 B" result on a method whose body is Task.Run(.) is not a zero-allocation method; it is a measurement of the wrong thread.
It counts managed allocation only. stackalloc, NativeMemory.Alloc, Marshal.AllocHGlobal, memory held by a native library, and anything served from a warm ArrayPool are all invisible.
"0 B allocated" means "asked the garbage collector for nothing", not "used no memory", which is exactly the claim a pooled implementation is making, and exactly why you must check for a missing Return some other way.
It is per-call, so [Params] changes its meaning. A method whose Allocated grows linearly with N and one whose Allocated is constant are telling you different things about scaling, and a single- N benchmark hides that. Parameterise on size whenever allocation could depend on it.

The fourth thing worth saying: Allocated is what you compare across runs, because it is deterministic in a way that Mean is not. If a refactor is meant to be allocation-neutral, Allocated is the regression test.

The shape of a pooling benchmark, the case where the harness lies to you most easily:

Three things this shape is deliberately doing, each of which is a defect in the version people write first:

[Params] includes a size 85,000 bytes, because that is where the answer changes character, Fresh becomes a gen-2 allocation per call while Pooled stays flat. A benchmark that only tests 4 kilobytes measures the boring half of the question.
The result is returned and Consume is NoInlining, so the buffer is genuinely used. Without that, escape analysis and dead-code elimination can remove the allocation you are trying to measure, and Fresh will look suspiciously good.
The pool is warm for the whole run, which is honest for a steady-state server and dishonest for a cold path. Pooled reporting 0 B is the benchmark saying "no managed allocation", not "no memory", the buffer exists, it is just held by the pool.
If you want the cold number, you need a fresh ArrayPool.Create() per iteration, and then [IterationSetup] overhead starts distorting short benchmarks. Pick which question you are asking and say which one in the write-up.

Common attributes, the full toolkit:

[Benchmark], maps to, Method is a benchmark candidate.
[Benchmark(Baseline = true)], maps to, Reference for Ratio column.
[Params(1, 10, 100)], maps to, Parameterize by value, one row per combination.
[ParamsSource(nameof(M))], maps to, Parameterize from a property or method.
[MemoryDiagnoser], maps to, Track allocations and garbage collector counts.
[ThreadingDiagnoser] (dot NET 5+), maps to, Track thread contention, completed-work-items.
[GlobalSetup] / [GlobalCleanup], maps to, Run once before / after all iterations.
[IterationSetup] / [IterationCleanup], maps to, Run before / after each iteration (use sparingly).
[SimpleJob(RuntimeMoniker.Net90)], maps to, Target a specific runtime.
[DisassemblyDiagnoser], maps to, Print jit'd assembly for the benchmark.
[EtwProfiler] / [PerfCollectProfiler], maps to, Capture ETW traces during the run.

Warmup versus measurement.

BenchmarkDotNet runs three phases automatically:

Pilot, figures out how many invocations make a measurable batch (for example, 1000 calls = 1 millisecond).
Warmup, runs until the measurements stabilise, so the jit can compile, tier up, and let dynamic PGO settle. Discarded.
Workload, the iterations that are actually reported.

Both counts are adaptive by default, not fixed: BDN chooses them from the measurements it is taking, bounded by MinWarmupIterationCount (6) / MaxWarmupIterationCount (50) and MinIterationCount (15) / MaxIterationCount (100).
The documentation's own advice is that you shouldn't specify WarmupCount / IterationCount / IterationTime yourself, because pinning them defeats the heuristic.
The reason to know the numbers anyway is diagnostic: a benchmark that ran the maximum warmup iterations was still moving when BDN gave up, which usually means tiering, a cache warming up, or state leaking between iterations, all of which mean the reported mean is not steady-state.
If your benchmark is dominated by first-call jit cost and you actually want to measure that, the tool for it is RunStrategy.ColdStart, not a smaller warmup count.

Common pitfalls.

Constant folding / dead-code elimination, the jit optimizes away code with no observable effect. A benchmark that returns void and has no side effects measures nothing.

Rule: always return the computed value from a benchmark. BDN consumes the return value to prevent elimination.

Inlining gives unrealistic results, if your benchmark method body is trivial, the jit may inline it into the harness, eliminating call overhead. Mark with [MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.NoInlining)] if you're specifically measuring call cost.

Running in Debug mode, BDN refuses to run on Debug builds by default (would give meaningless numbers). Always use Release config.

Running under a debugger attached, disables tier-2 jit optimizations. BDN warns if Debugger.IsAttached.

Benchmarks affecting each other via static state, if benchmark A leaves the heap in a different shape than benchmark B, you'll see noise. Use [IterationSetup] to reset state.

Async benchmarks need [Benchmark] to return Task / ValueTask, BDN awaits it correctly. Don't .Wait() inside the benchmark.

Allocations from the benchmark harness itself, BDN reports only allocations attributable to the benchmark method body, but closures or lambdas inside can sneak in. Profile-check by setting up private static readonly cache fields outside the benchmark.

Cold cache versus warm cache, micro-benchmarks measure steady-state, warm-cache, fully-tiered-up performance. Real requests arrive against cold C P U caches, cold branch predictors, and sometimes tier-0 code.
BDN can be told to measure the cold case with [SimpleJob(RunStrategy.ColdStart)] (a RunStrategy value, not a standalone attribute), but the default Throughput strategy is what everyone runs, and it systematically flatters anything whose working set doesn't fit in cache.

Tiny differences aren't real, BenchmarkDotNet prints an Error (half of the 99.9% confidence interval) and StdDev for a reason. If the intervals of two rows overlap, you have measured noise, and no threshold rule of thumb rescues that. Report the interval, not the mean.

Synthetic benchmarks not equal to production wins, a micro-benchmark improvement on a function that is a negligible share of request time saves you nothing. Amdahl's law is the argument, and the fraction is the number you need.
Profile real workloads ( dotnet-trace, PerfView ) to establish it before optimizing.

Beyond micro-benchmarks:

dotnet-counters monitor -p --counters System.Runtime, live runtime stats. Note the syntax: --counters takes provider[counter,counter], so a filtered view is --counters System.Runtime[dotnet gc collections,dotnet gc heap total allocated].
Passing a bare counter name without its provider does not work.
dotnet-trace collect, full ETW-style trace; view in PerfView or Speedscope. Also the way to capture System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource.
dotnet-gcdump collect -p, the object graph of a live process, reconstructed from EventPipe events with low enough overhead to take under load. Two of these, minutes apart, diffed in Visual Studio or PerfView, is the standard answer to "what is growing and what still references it".
This is the tool most candidates don't know exists.
dotnet-dump analyze, post-mortem heap analysis with SOS commands ( dumpheap -stat, gcroot, gchandles, finalizequeue, dumpasync ).
JetBrains dot Memory / dot Trace, U I-based memory + C P U profiling.
PerfView (Vance Morrison), the gold standard for low-level C L R perf investigation.

Measuring in production, the A P Is, not the tools.

BenchmarkDotNet answers "which of these two implementations allocates less". It cannot answer "is garbage collector why our p99 moved last Tuesday". For that the runtime exposes the numbers directly, and a senior candidate should be able to name them without reaching for a profiler.

GCMemoryInfo is the one worth knowing properly. Its properties answer distinct questions:

Generation, maps to, Was the last collection a gen 0, 1 or 2?.
PauseDurations, maps to, How long were the stop-the-world phases of that collection? (A background gen 2 has two.).
PauseTimePercentage, maps to, What share of total process elapsed time has been spent paused, cumulatively? Documented as a running counter updated at the end of each garbage collector.
HeapSizeBytes / TotalCommittedBytes, maps to, Live heap versus memory actually committed, the gap is the garbage collector's headroom, and the reason committed exceeds heap.
FragmentedBytes, maps to, How much of the heap is holes. Rising over time on the LOH is the fragmentation story.
PinnedObjectsCount, maps to, How many pinned objects the garbage collector had to work around.
MemoryLoadBytes / HighMemoryLoadThresholdBytes, maps to, How close the process is to the level where the garbage collector starts doing aggressive full compacting collections. In a container, both are measured against the container limit.
Compacted / Concurrent, maps to, Whether that collection compacted, and whether it ran in the background.

And the modern path: built-in metrics (dot NET 9+). The runtime now publishes a System.Runtime Meter, which means garbage collector data flows into OpenTelemetry and your existing dashboards with no custom code:

dotnet gc collections, maps to, Collection count, tagged gc heap generation = gen0 / gen1 / gen2.
dotnet gc heap total allocated, maps to, Same value as garbage collector.GetTotalAllocatedBytes().
dotnet gc pause time, maps to, Same value as garbage collector.GetTotalPauseDuration().
dotnet gc last collection heap size, maps to, Heap size at the last collection, tagged by generation including loh and poh.
dotnet gc last collection heap fragmentation size, maps to, Fragmentation, tagged by generation.
dotnet gc last collection memory committed size, maps to, Committed bytes at the last collection.
dotnet process memory working set, maps to, Process working set, the number the container limit is enforced against.

Version gate worth stating precisely: these instruments arrived in dot NET 9. On dot NET 8 and earlier the same tooling falls back to the older System.Runtime EventCounters with different names ( gen-0-gc-count, gc-heap-size, alloc-rate, time-in-gc, loh-size, poh-size ).
If a dashboard broke on the dot NET 9 upgrade, this rename is why.

The two derived signals worth alerting on, in order:

Pause time as a fraction of elapsed time, from dotnet gc pause time or PauseTimePercentage. This is the only garbage collector number that maps directly onto user-visible latency.
Allocation rate, the derivative of dotnet gc heap total allocated. It is the cause; everything else on this list is an effect. A regression here precedes the pause-time regression, which makes it the better alert.

In the real world: a team adds a garbage collector dashboard and alerts on heap size. It never fires, because the heap is healthy, the service allocates furiously but everything dies in Gen 0, so the heap stays small and flat while the process spends a significant fraction of its time paused.
The alert that would have caught it is pause-time percentage, which is the ratio nobody thinks to graph because every tutorial graphs bytes. Heap size tells you about retention; pause time tells you about latency, and they are different failures.

In the real world: a "zero-allocation" rewrite of a request-enrichment step is signed off on a benchmark reporting 0 B allocated. In production the allocation rate doesn't move at all.
The rewrite had moved the enrichment onto a Task.Run, and [MemoryDiagnoser] measures the benchmark thread, so every allocation the work still did happened on a thread the harness wasn't watching.
Worse, the change added a thread-pool work item per request, so the real effect was more allocation plus scheduling latency. Nothing about the benchmark was misconfigured; it answered the question it was asked.
The senior habit is to state, in the write-up, which thread and which memory the number covers, "0 B on the calling thread, managed only" is a claim you can check, and "zero-allocation" is not.

In the real world: an optimization is validated with a BenchmarkDotNet run showing a large improvement, shipped, and produces no measurable change in p99. The benchmark was correct. The method being optimized ran once per request against a database call that dominated everything.
The reviewer's question that would have saved the sprint is not "is this benchmark sound?" but "what fraction of a request does this method account for?", and the honest answer, "I don't know, I only measured the method", is the answer that ends the discussion.

-- pause --
Section 3. Code and diagrams.

Span lifecycle:

Pooled buffer round-trip:

Where an allocation can actually land (dot NET 10):

Where a struct Point { int X, Y; } actually lives, five answers, one type:

Why a reference store costs more than an int store:

-- pause --
Section 4. Common pitfalls.

stackalloc in a loop. Each iteration allocates more stack, eventually overflows. Move outside the loop.
Forgetting to Return an ArrayPool rental. The pool degrades to plain allocation, invisible in the type system, but not invisible to diagnostics: System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource reports BufferAllocated with reason PoolExhausted.
Always pair Rent with Return in try or finally, or use IMemoryOwner with using.
Holding a Span past its memory's lifetime. Compiler usually catches this (ref struct rules), but MemoryMarshal.CreateSpan can defeat the check, be careful.
Span in async methods. Since C sharp 13 the local is legal; what fails is keeping it live across the await (CS4007). A ref struct parameter is still an outright error (CS4012). Use Memory for the field or parameter, Span only inside synchronous segments.
Using link where you meant slicing. arr.Skip(10).Take(20) allocates iterator objects (and a closure if the lambda captures); materializing it with ToArray() allocates the array too. arr.AsSpan(10, 20) allocates nothing, a span is a pointer and a length. For contiguous data, prefer span slicing.
stackalloc returning to caller. You can't, the stack frame is gone. Use Span only inside the allocating method.
Pinning a large object with fixed for too long. Pinned objects can't be moved by the garbage collector, fragmenting the heap. Pin briefly.
Treating string.Create as always faster. It's a one-allocation path if you know the final length. For unknown sizes, StringBuilder is often clearer and similar in speed.
Profiling synthetic benchmarks but not real code. A micro-benchmark improvement on a helper method does not transfer to the endpoint unless that method is a meaningful share of the endpoint's time, and the work a span replaces usually isn't.
Establish the share first, in a production-shape workload, then optimize.
Reaching for unsafe before Span + MemoryMarshal. Almost every "I need pointers" case is now solved by safe primitives. MemoryMarshal.Cast, MemoryMarshal.AsBytes, MemoryMarshal.GetReference cover most of the gap.
Returning a pooled array twice. Usually an exception path that returns, plus a finally that returns again. The array is now in the pool twice, two callers rent the same buffer, and you get cross-request data corruption with no exception anywhere.
Microsoft's docs classify this as a high-severity security issue; null out the local before returning so a second return is a NullReferenceException you can find.
Returning an array the pool didn't give you. ArrayPool.Return requires the array's length to match a bucket size exactly and throws ArgumentException otherwise. Return(new byte[1000]) throws.
Not clearing a reference-type pooled array. ArrayPool.Shared.Return(buf) with the default clear Array: false leaves every element reachable from the pool for the life of the process. Nothing clears it for you.
Assuming Rent(n) gives you n and gives you zeros. It gives you at least n, and for primitive element types the shared pool may hand back memory that was never zeroed. Track what you wrote and slice to it.
Alerting on heap size instead of pause time. A service can spend a large share of its wall clock paused while its heap stays small and flat, because everything dies in Gen 0. dotnet gc pause time / GCMemoryInfo.PauseTimePercentage is the latency signal; heap size is the retention signal.
Treating stack allocation by the jit as something you can rely on. Escape analysis is an optimization with no language guarantee; it doesn't apply in Debug or tier-0 code, and an innocuous refactor that makes a method un-inlineable silently reverses it.
Believing _logger.LogDebug($".") is free when Debug is off. Microsoft.Extensions.Logging has no interpolated-string-handler overload, so the string is built and allocated regardless, and the message template, and with it every structured field, is destroyed. Enable CA2254.
Answering "value types live on the stack". They live wherever their storage lives: in the enclosing object if they're a field, in the array if they're an element, in the display class if captured, in the state-machine box if they cross an await.
Say "the stack is an implementation detail; what's guaranteed is copy semantics and lifetime".
Calling garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion and ignoring the bool. On false you are not in the region, and the matching garbage collector.EndNoGCRegion() throws InvalidOperationException, usually from inside a finally, where it replaces the original problem with a worse one.
Guard on GCSettings.LatencyMode == GCLatencyMode.NoGCRegion.
Presizing a collection from untrusted input. EnsureCapacity(userSuppliedCount) is the stackalloc -from-input bug one layer up; the A P I's own docs say to clamp it or let the collection grow instead.
Letting a long-lived publisher hold short-lived subscribers. += stores a strong reference to the subscriber in the publisher's invocation list. A singleton event plus scoped subscribers is a leak that grows with total requests served, forever.
Reading Marshal.SizeOf() as "the size of the struct". It is the marshalled size, a bool becomes 4 bytes by default. Unsafe.SizeOf() is the managed layout size.
Trusting a 0 B benchmark result. [MemoryDiagnoser] measures managed allocation on the benchmark thread only. Work moved to the thread pool, stackalloc, native memory, and a warm pool are all invisible to it.
Assuming a struct gets reference equality by default. It gets ValueType.Equals, which compares fields (reflectively unless the type qualifies for the bitwise fast path) and boxes on the way in. == isn't generated at all, that one is a compile error.

-- pause --
Section 5. Interview-ready summary.

The allocation taxonomy: object new, boxing, strings, arrays, closures. Profile first, then attack the dominant source.
Span = ref struct view over contiguous memory (heap array, stack, native). Zero alloc, near-pointer speed. Restricted: no async crossings, no class fields, no boxing. Slicing is free.
ReadOnlySpan = immutable view. string.AsSpan() is the canonical entry point.
Memory = heap-allocatable cousin. Use for async transit; convert to Span for actual work.
stackalloc allocates on the stack. Combined with Span, gives small fixed buffers with zero garbage collector. Keep at most ~1 kilobyte; never in a loop.
ArrayPool.Shared for variable / large buffers. Rent + Return (or IMemoryOwner + using ).
string.Create, DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler, UTF-8 literals ( "abc"u8 ), source-gen logging, the four major allocation-free string idioms.
unsafe rarely the right tool now. Span + MemoryMarshal cover most cases. Reserve unsafe for native interop or sub- Span performance.
BenchmarkDotNet + [MemoryDiagnoser], measure allocations, don't guess. Real workload profiling beats micro-benchmarks for end-user impact.
record struct, readonly struct, ref struct, the type-system primitives that make the rest of these tools safe and ergonomic.
Escape analysis, the jit stack-allocates objects it can prove don't escape: boxes (dot NET 9), small fixed-size arrays of value and reference types, objects held only in local struct fields, and non-escaping delegates (dot NET 10). " new means heap" is now a half-truth.
Write barriers and card tables, a reference store into a heap field costs more than a value store, because the jit emits a barrier that marks the card so a young collection can skip tracing old generations.
Regions, not segments (dot NET 7+), 4 megabytes SOH regions, 8 times for UOH, with a large reserved (not committed) virtual range. Old segment-era advice like RetainVM no longer means what it did.
Containers, the garbage collector heap hard limit defaults to the larger of 20 megabytes and 75% of the cgroup limit; the remaining headroom belongs to native memory, the jit, and thread stacks. Workstation garbage collector is forced on a single-logical-C P U machine regardless of configuration.
DATAS is on by default from dot NET 9.
Pooling has three tiers: stackalloc (no allocator at all), ArrayPool / MemoryPool (buffers), ObjectPool + IResettable (objects whose initialization is the cost).
Production measurement, garbage collector.GetTotalAllocatedBytes(), garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread(), garbage collector.GetTotalPauseDuration() (dot NET 7+), garbage collector.GetGCMemoryInfo(), and the System.Runtime Meter (dot NET 9+).
Alert on pause-time fraction and allocation rate, not heap size.
Stack versus heap, not a property of the type, a property of the storage location. A value type lives in whatever contains it: a class field lives in the heap object, an array element in the array, a captured local in the display class, a local crossing await in the state-machine box.
What the language guarantees is copy semantics and lifetime, not placement. Thread stacks are a fixed reservation (1 megabyte from the PE header on Windows; ulimit -s on Linux; DOTNET_DefaultStackSize to override), and you cannot set the size of a thread-pool thread's stack.
Growth is the hidden allocator, List starts from a shared empty array, allocates DefaultCapacity = 4 on first Add, then doubles; filling to N allocates ~log₂(N) arrays and ~2N slots' worth of bytes.
EnsureCapacity (Dictionary or HashSet dot NET Core 2.1; List or Stack or Queue dot NET 6), CollectionsMarshal.SetCount (dot NET 8), Array.Empty(). Never presize from untrusted input.
The root set, thread stacks and registers, statics and [ThreadStatic], garbage collector handles ( Normal / Pinned / Weak / WeakTrackResurrection ), the finalization queue, runtime internals. Every managed "leak" is unintended retention, and gcroot is the command that names it.
Weak options: WeakReference (short versus track Resurrection ), ConditionalWeakTable, DependentHandle (dot NET 6+).
Liveness is precise, not lexical, an object can be finalized while one of its own methods runs; a delegate handed to native code can be collected while native still holds the pointer. garbage collector.KeepAlive at the end of the range, or better, a field or a SafeHandle.
Runtime-settable garbage collector knobs, GCSettings.LatencyMode ( LowLatency is workstation-only;
SustainedLowLatency needs background garbage collector and grows the heap), garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion / EndNoGCRegion (returns bool, no nesting, single-arg overload commits 2 times total Size ),
garbage collector.AddMemoryPressure / RemoveMemoryPressure for native memory the garbage collector can't see, and remove exactly what you add.
Data locality, a heap object costs an 8-byte header slot plus an 8-byte method-table pointer, with a 24-byte minimum on x64; struct fields and array elements pay none of it. Structs default to LayoutKind.Sequential and classes to Auto, so field order matters for one and not the other.
Reference-type array stores pay a covariance check and a write barrier. Cache lines are 64 bytes (128 on ARM64) and false sharing is the reason throughput can fall as you add threads.
[MemoryDiagnoser] limits, measured via garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread, in a separate iteration set: benchmark thread only, managed allocation only. 0 B is a narrower claim than "zero-allocation".

-- pause --
Section 6. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this section once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A. Practice answering the cross-questions without re-reading. If you stumble on any cross-Q², go re-read the relevant section.

-- pause --
Drill 1, Gen 0 versus Gen 2.

Q: What's the difference between a Gen 0 and a Gen 2 collection, and which one hurts p99 latency?-- think --

A: Gen 0 collects newly-allocated objects; runs frequently (every few megabytes), pauses are sub-millisecond, only scans the small Gen 0 region.
Gen 2 collects long-lived survivors plus the LOH; runs rarely (seconds to minutes), pauses can be tens to hundreds of milliseconds, scans the entire managed heap.
Gen 2 pauses are what spike p99 latency under load.

Cross-Q: If most allocations die young, why isn't my web service Gen 2-free?-- think --

A: Three sources push objects to Gen 2: (1) LOH allocations, any allocation at least 85,000 bytes goes straight to LOH which is collected as part of Gen 2; (2) closures and async state machines that capture long-lived state survive Gen 0 or 1 and promote;
(3) caches ( IMemoryCache, static dictionaries) by design hold references to objects that survive multiple collections.
Profile with dotnet-counters monitor System.Runtime --counters gen-2-gc-count to find the rate; allocation trace with dotnet-trace to find the source.

Cross-Q²: Why doesn't dot NET just have one generation and skip the complexity?-- think --

A: The generational hypothesis, most objects die young. A single-generation collector would trace the entire heap on every collection, paying for objects that are obviously alive (caches, configuration, the D I container).
Generational tracing lets the garbage collector touch only the small young region most of the time and pay for the full heap rarely.
The trade-off it buys with is bookkeeping: an old object can reference a young one, so the runtime must record those references or the young collection would be unsound.
That is what the write barrier and card table do, the jit emits a barrier on every reference store into a heap field, marking the card so a young collection traces only the dirtied portion of the old generations.
So the honest summary is: generational garbage collector trades a small, constant cost on every reference write for a large saving on every collection. Name the write barrier and you've answered the question behind the question.

-- pause --
Drill 2, LOH threshold.

Q: Why does the LOH have an 85,000-byte threshold? Why that specific number?-- think --

A: ~85 kilobytes, the cost of copying the object during compaction exceeds the cost of leaving a hole in the heap. The C L R's Gen 0 or 1 or 2 are compacting collectors, they slide surviving objects together to eliminate fragmentation.
Past some size, moving the object is more expensive than tolerating fragmentation, so LOH is non-compacting by default.
The exact number was chosen by measurement, not derived, if an interviewer pushes for a reason behind 85,000 specifically, the correct move is to say it was empirically tuned rather than to invent one.
And it is tunable upward: System.garbage collector.LOHThreshold in runtimeconfig.json (or DOTNET_GCLOHThreshold, hex, as an env var) has existed since dot NET Core 3.0.
The value must exceed the default and may be capped by the runtime; read back the effective value with garbage collector.GetConfigurationVariables().

Cross-Q: What's the consequence of LOH being non-compacting?-- think --

A: Fragmentation. Repeatedly allocating and freeing differently-sized large objects leaves holes the garbage collector can't combine.
After a while, the LOH may have 200 megabytes of "free" space scattered across 1000 holes, but a new 5 megabytes allocation can't fit because no single hole is that big.
You'll see OutOfMemoryException on a process that the operating system thinks has plenty of RAM.
You can manually trigger an LOH compaction once with GCSettings.LargeObjectHeapCompactionMode = GCLargeObjectHeapCompactionMode.CompactOnce followed by garbage collector.Collect(), but it's expensive (full Gen 2 + move every LOH object), only do it after a known bulk-allocation phase.

Cross-Q²: I have a Jason serializer producing 100 kilobytes documents at 1000 req or s. What do I do?-- think --

A: Three layers. (1) Stream to the output, don't materialize the document; use Utf8JsonWriter writing directly to the response Stream. The serializer's internal buffer is pooled ( ArrayPool ) and stays the LOH threshold.
(2) If you must buffer (for example, to compute Content-Length), rent from ArrayPool.Shared.Rent(102400), pool buffers are reused, no LOH churn. (3) Monitor with dotnet-counters to confirm loh-size is flat over time.
If you're already using System.Text.Json correctly, all this is done for you, most LOH pressure in modern services comes from logging or custom CSV or X M L generators.

-- pause --
Drill 3, Pinned Object Heap.

Q: When would you allocate into the Pinned Object Heap, and why does it exist?-- think --

A: POH (Pinned Object Heap, dot NET 5+) is for long-lived buffers that must remain at a fixed memory address, typically passed to native code via P or Invoke or used by zero-copy I O (Kestrel sockets, G R P C).
Before POH, the only way to pin was fixed blocks or GCHandle.Alloc(Pinned), which kept the object in Gen 0 but un-moveable, causing fragmentation around it. POH allocates these objects in a dedicated region the garbage collector never tries to compact.

Cross-Q: Show me the A P I.-- think --

A:
csharp.
// dot NET 5+, allocates directly into POH.
byte[] buffer = garbage collector.AllocateArray(length: 4096, pinned: true);
// 'pinned: true' is the POH switch; default false uses regular heap.

// Faster variant, skip zero-init for unmanaged element types.
byte[] fast = garbage collector.AllocateUninitializedArray(length: 4096, pinned: true);

The returned array can be passed to native code; its address won't change for the lifetime of the array. No fixed block needed.

Cross-Q²: When is POH the wrong choice?-- think --

A: Three cases. (1) Short-lived buffers, POH objects survive Gen 2 collections (treated like Gen 2 by default), so a short-lived POH allocation pays Gen 2 cost forever. Use ArrayPool with clear Array: true instead.
(2) Buffers that won't be passed to native code, pinning has no benefit; you're just paying for a separate heap region. (3) Hot allocation patterns, POH allocation is the same cost as any heap allocation; pooling beats it. Rule: POH for long-lived interop buffers; pool for everything else.

-- pause --
Drill 4, stackalloc safety.

Q: Span buf = stackalloc byte[size]; where size comes from a request parameter. Critique.-- think --

A: Stack overflow waiting to happen. The C L R doesn't bounds-check stackalloc against the remaining thread stack; a malicious or buggy size of 10 megabytes immediately terminates the process, no catchable exception.
Default thread stack is 1 megabyte on Windows, and A S P dot NET Core middleware already consumes hundreds of kilobytes. The remaining headroom is small.

Cross-Q: Show me the safe pattern.-- think --

A: Clamp to a known-safe constant, fall back to ArrayPool:
csharp.
const int Threshold = 256;
byte[]? rented = null;
Span buffer = size <= Threshold.
? stackalloc byte[Threshold].
: (rented = ArrayPool.Shared.Rent(size));
try {.
var slice = buffer.Slice(0, size);
// use slice.
}.
finally {.
if (rented is not null) ArrayPool.Shared.Return(rented);
}.

This is the canonical dot NET BCL idiom, Utf8JsonReader, Path, Regex all use variants.

Cross-Q²: Why is stackalloc in a for loop dangerous even with bounded size?-- think --

A: The C sharp spec says the lifetime of stackalloc is the enclosing method, not the loop iteration. Each iteration's stackalloc adds to the stack frame and doesn't reclaim until the method returns.
A loop allocating 256 bytes for 10,000 iterations consumes ~2.5 megabytes of stack, far exceeding the 1 megabyte Windows default. The fix: move the stackalloc outside the loop and reuse the buffer; or use ArrayPool if the size varies.
The diagnostic that catches this is the code-analysis rule CA2014, "Do not use stackalloc in loops", an analyzer rule, not a compiler warning, so it fires only if analyzers are enabled.
(Don't confuse it with CS9081, which is a compiler warning about a stackalloc result possibly escaping its method, a different bug.) The safest rule remains "no stackalloc inside loop bodies, ever"; CA2014 's own docs allow suppression only when the loop runs a known-small number of times.

-- pause --
Drill 5, Span versus byte[].

Q: What does Span buy you over byte[] ?-- think --

A: Three things: (1) Zero-allocation slicing, arr.AsSpan(10, 50) creates a span pointing into arr without allocating; arr.Skip(10).Take(50).ToArray() allocates a new array.
(2) Unified A P I over heap, stack, and native memory, the same Span works whether the bytes came from new byte[N], stackalloc, or Marshal.AllocHGlobal. (3) Compile-time lifetime safety, the compiler refuses to let a span escape its data's lifetime, preventing use-after-free at the managed level.

Cross-Q: Can I store a Span in a class field?-- think --

A: No, compile error. Span is a ref struct, which the runtime treats as stack-only. The reason: a Span may point to stack memory ( stackalloc ); allowing it as a class field could let the span survive past its stack frame, causing memory corruption.
For storage, use Memory (regular struct, heap-storable), then convert via .Span for synchronous work.

Cross-Q²: Why can't a Span cross an await ?-- think --

A: Async methods are lowered by the compiler into a state machine, a class that hoists every local that is live across a suspension point into a field, so the method can be paused and resumed. A Span held across the await would become a field of a class, which the ref struct rules forbid.
Be precise about the version gate, because the blanket rule most people quote is out of date: through C sharp 12 merely declaring a ref struct local anywhere in an async method was an error.
Since C sharp 13 the declaration is legal and the compiler objects only when the value is still needed after the suspension, Microsoft Learn's ref struct types puts it as "a ref struct variable can't be used in the same block as the await expression", which surfaces as CS4007,
"Instance of type 'System.Span and lt;int and gt;' cannot be preserved across 'await' or 'yield' boundary." A ref struct parameter is still rejected outright with CS4012, because a parameter is live at every suspension point by definition.
Workaround unchanged: store Memory across the await, convert to Span only within synchronous segments between awaits. See Type System, ref struct for the full current restriction list.

-- pause --
Drill 6, ArrayPool cost or benefit.

Q: When does ArrayPool.Rent actually beat new ?-- think --

A: Two conditions, and neither is a number you can memorise.
First, the buffer must be big enough that the allocation contributes meaningfully to Gen 0 budget consumption, a few hundred bytes, stackalloc beats both and ~85,000 bytes pooling is close to mandatory because you're otherwise allocating straight into the LOH.
Second, the same path must rent the same size often enough that the buffer stays warm in the pool's per-thread slot or per-core stack, that's what makes a rent a pointer swap rather than an allocation. If either fails, new is competitive and simpler.
Note the asymmetry that makes this an easy call at the top end: new byte[100_000] is a gen-2 allocation every single time, whereas the pooled version is one allocation ever.

Cross-Q: What's the failure mode I need to test for?-- think --

A: Forgotten Return. The pool degrades to plain allocation when starved; the symptom is allocations creeping up under load, and the root cause is almost always a path that rents but doesn't return when it throws.
It is not silent, though, which is the part most people don't know: ArrayPool publishes an EventSource named System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource with BufferRented, BufferAllocated, BufferReturned and BufferDropped events, and BufferAllocated carries a reason, Pooled (cold start),
PoolExhausted (rentals outnumber returns), or OverMaximumSize (you're renting bigger than the pool caches).
A stream of PoolExhausted under load is the diagnosis. Capture it with dotnet-trace collect --providers System.Buffers.ArrayPoolEventSource. Prevention: try or finally, or MemoryPool.Shared.Rent() for IMemoryOwner: IDisposable.

Cross-Q²: I Return a buffer that held a J W T. Two requests later, the next caller gets the same array. What do they see?-- think --

A: They see your J W T, in the unused portion. Return(arr, clear Array: false) (the default) doesn't zero the buffer, and nothing else does either, I'd correct a common misconception here: neither pool implementation in CoreLib clears automatically for any element type, including reference types.
So Return(arr, clear Array: true) (or arr.AsSpan(0, length).Clear() before returning) is on you.
For reference-type arrays there's a second reason beyond disclosure: an uncleared ArrayPool buffer keeps every element reachable from the pool, which is a process-lifetime garbage collector root, a leak that never appears in a reference chain mentioning your code.
And going the other way, Rent for primitive element types may hand back memory the runtime deliberately did not zero ( garbage collector.AllocateUninitializedArray on the miss path), so you cannot treat the tail of a rented buffer as zeros either.
Any pool usage in a security-sensitive path needs an explicit clear Array: true and a comment saying why.

-- pause --
Drill 7, ValueTask versus Task.

Q: When would you switch from Task to ValueTask, and what breaks?-- think --

A: Switch when the method usually completes synchronously (cached result, fast-path check) on a hot path. ValueTask is a struct, so the synchronous path returns a value rather than allocating a Task.
What breaks: callers can no longer await the same value twice, call .Result before awaiting, or pass it to Task.WhenAll, the struct may wrap a pooled, single-use source. And be precise about what it does not buy you: it removes the Task object, not the async state machine.
If the method actually suspends, the compiler-generated state machine struct still gets boxed onto the heap, and that box is the larger object. ValueTask is an optimization for the cache-hit shape specifically.

Cross-Q: Should I always return ValueTask from my async methods then?-- think --

A: No. ValueTask is an optimization tool, not a default. Reasons to stick with Task: (1) Caller ergonomics, Task is the universal contract; ValueTask adds caller-side rules they need to remember.
(2) Caching the result for multiple awaiters, Task is freely awaitable any number of times; ValueTask is not. (3) Composition with Task.WhenAll / Task.WhenAny, these expect Task; vt.AsTask() defeats the optimization.
Rule: ValueTask for hot-path internal A P Is with synchronous fast-paths; Task for everything else.

Cross-Q²: IAsyncEnumerator.MoveNextAsync() returns ValueTask. Why was that choice made?-- think --

A: Because the allocation would be per element, not per call. When iterating already-buffered data, every MoveNext completes synchronously; returning Task would allocate one object per item, so a single enumeration of N items produces N garbage objects for zero benefit.
ValueTask with synchronous completion allocates nothing for the whole iteration.
There is a second reason that's worth knowing because it applies even when the iteration does go async: a ValueTask can be backed by an IValueTaskSource that the enumerator reuses across every MoveNextAsync call, whereas a Task is single-use by construction and must be a fresh object each time.
So ValueTask is the only choice that can make a long async iteration allocation-free end to end. This is the canonical example of why ValueTask exists, and why IAsyncEnumerable shipped only after ValueTask was stable.

-- pause --
Drill 8, Defensive copy.

Q: void Method(in BigStruct s) { var x = s.X; } where BigStruct is NOT readonly. Does this copy s ?-- think --

A: Likely yes, depends on what s.X is. If X is a property (a method call) or any non- readonly instance method, the compiler emits a defensive copy: it copies s to a hidden local first, then accesses .X on the copy.
The reason: without readonly guarantees, the compiler can't prove X 's getter won't mutate s, and the in contract promises the caller's variable doesn't change.

Cross-Q: How do I prevent the defensive copy?-- think --

A: Two options. (1) Make the struct readonly struct, the compiler now knows nothing in the struct can mutate this, so no defensive copy. (2) Mark individual methods or properties readonly (C sharp 8+): public readonly int X goes to _x; or public readonly int Magnitude() goes to..
The readonly keyword on members promises they don't mutate. Detection: Roslyn analyzer IDE0250 suggests readonly struct; in I L look for the dup / stloc / ldloca pattern before the call.

Cross-Q²: I have a 256-byte struct in a hot loop iterating 100M times. How much does the defensive copy cost?-- think --

A: Don't quote a figure, describe what's being paid, because that's what generalises.
Per copy: a 256-byte memcpy, a 256-byte stack slot that evicts something else from L1, and, the part people miss, one copy per member access, not one per iteration, since each property getter is a separate call the compiler must protect. So a loop body touching four properties pays four copies.
On top of the direct cost it blocks optimizations: the hidden copy is an aliasing barrier, so the jit stops hoisting and stops vectorizing.
And the fix is a single keyword on the type declaration with no call-site change and no behavioural change, combine it with in so void Process(in BigReadOnlyStruct s) passes a pointer instead of 256 bytes.
If the interviewer wants a number, the correct answer is "I'd put it under [MemoryDiagnoser] with and without readonly and show you", which is also the true answer.

-- pause --
Drill 9, readonly struct guarantees.

Q: What does the readonly keyword on a struct declaration actually guarantee?-- think --

A: Four things, compile-enforced: (1) All instance fields must be readonly, can only be assigned in the constructor. (2) All instance properties are get-only or init -only, no setters. (3) All instance methods are implicitly readonly, they cannot mutate this.
(4) Compiler emits no defensive copies when the struct is passed via in or accessed through ref readonly.

Cross-Q: Does readonly struct give me thread safety?-- think --

A: Almost. The struct itself is immutable, so reads from multiple threads are safe. But: when assigning a struct, the assignment is not atomic for structs larger than the native word size (8 bytes on 64-bit). A reader could see a half-updated struct mid-write, torn read.
To be fully thread-safe across writes, either keep the struct at most 8 bytes, or use Volatile.Read / Interlocked.CompareExchange for assignment, or wrap in a class with a single reference swap. readonly struct solves immutability, not atomic update.

Cross-Q²: What's the difference between readonly struct, record struct, and readonly record struct ?-- think --

A: readonly struct, the keyword constraints, and nothing about equality. Be careful here, because the common wrong answer is "structs get reference equality by default": they do not.
Every struct inherits ValueType.Equals, which Microsoft's own guidance describes as performing "a value equality check by using reflection to compare the values of every field in the type", correct, but slow, and it goes through Equals(object), so calling it boxes.
(CoreCLR has a bitwise fast path, gated on the type containing no pointers and being tightly packed, so whether you get the fast or the reflective path depends on your fields.) Separately,
== is not generated for a plain struct at all, "the == and != operators can't operate on a struct unless the struct explicitly overloads them", so a == b on a bare struct is a compile error.
record struct, generates Equals(T), IEquatable, GetHashCode, and == / != for you, but its positional properties are mutable ( record struct Point(int X, int Y) has settable X and Y ). readonly record struct, both: immutable and generated value equality.
For dictionary keys, hot loops, and value-typed coordinates, readonly record struct is the modern best choice, and the reason is concrete rather than stylistic:
it gives you a non-boxing IEquatable.Equals and a real GetHashCode, which is what Dictionary looks for before it falls back to the slow path.

-- pause --
Drill 10, IDisposable and finalizers.

Q: I'm writing a class that holds an HttpClient and a FileStream. Do I need a finalizer?-- think --

A: No. Both HttpClient and FileStream are managed IDisposable s, they own their own unmanaged resources (sockets, file handles) and have their own finalizers as safety nets. Your class just needs to implement IDisposable and call Dispose() on both fields.
Adding a finalizer here would add garbage collector overhead (every instance enters the finalizer queue, survives an extra garbage collector) for zero benefit, the cleanup would happen anyway via the children's finalizers.

Cross-Q: When DO I need a finalizer?-- think --

A: When your class directly owns an unmanaged resource, a raw IntPtr to a native handle, memory from Marshal.AllocHGlobal, or any resource not wrapped in another IDisposable. The finalizer is the safety net in case the caller forgets Dispose().
In 2026, prefer SafeHandle, its built-in finalizer handles cleanup, so your class needs only IDisposable and no finalizer of its own. The full Dispose pattern with ~MyClass() and protected virtual void Dispose(bool disposing) is now rarely needed in application code.

Cross-Q²: Why does Dispose() typically call garbage collector.SuppressFinalize(this) ?-- think --

A: To tell the garbage collector "this object is fully cleaned up; skip the finalizer".
Without SuppressFinalize, the object survives one extra garbage collector cycle: it sits in the f-reachable queue, the finalizer thread runs ~MyClass() (which is now redundant work), then it's collected on the next cycle.
SuppressFinalize removes the object from the finalization queue so it's collected on the first eligible cycle, saves both C P U and one generation of memory pressure.
Always call it in the Dispose() method when your class has a finalizer, even if the finalizer body is empty after Dispose-cleanup runs.

-- pause --
Drill 11, IAsyncDisposable.

Q: When would you implement IAsyncDisposable over IDisposable ?-- think --

A: When the cleanup work itself does I O, flushing a network buffer, gracefully closing a sequel connection (which may send a goodbye packet), draining a Channel, awaiting in-flight tasks before disposal.
Sync Dispose() would block the calling thread, which is unacceptable in async-first code paths (every blocked thread is a thread-pool starvation risk). IAsyncDisposable.DisposeAsync() returns ValueTask and the caller uses await using for scope-bound disposal.

Cross-Q: Should I implement both IDisposable and IAsyncDisposable ?-- think --

A: Usually yes, for maximum caller compatibility. The BCL convention: DisposeAsync() does the real work; Dispose() either calls DisposeAsync().AsTask().GetAwaiter().GetResult() (sync-over-async, with caveats) or duplicates the cleanup logic synchronously.
HttpClient, Stream, DbContext all implement both. Caveat: await using calls DisposeAsync only; using calls Dispose. If only IAsyncDisposable is implemented and someone writes using x =.;, they get a compile error, explicit but not always desirable.

Cross-Q²: await using versus using: what's the lowered code?-- think --

A: using lowers to a try or finally calling obj.Dispose(). await using lowers to a try or finally calling await obj.DisposeAsync().
The finally block runs the async dispose synchronously to the surrounding async method's flow, if DisposeAsync throws, the exception surfaces from the enclosing scope, same as sync using.
One gotcha: await using is only legal inside an async method; using it in a sync context is a compile error (which is what you want, it forces the caller to be async-aware).

-- pause --
Drill 12, String concat in a hot loop.

Q: Why is result += items[i] in a 10,000-iteration loop catastrophic?-- think --

A: Strings are immutable, so each += allocates a new string equal to result.Length + items[i].Length and copies all of result into it. The allocation count is O(N); the bytes allocated and copied are O(N²), because iteration i re-copies everything the previous i−1 iterations produced.
Two things follow that make it worse than the big-O suggests: with UTF-16, 85,000 bytes is about 42,500 characters, so past that point every single iteration produces a large object and contributes directly to Gen 2;
and the intermediates are exactly the objects most likely to still be alive when a collection runs, so they get promoted rather than dying cheaply in Gen 0.

Cross-Q: What are the three fixes ranked by perf?-- think --

A: Rank them by allocation count and bytes copied, which is the property you can reason about without a benchmark. (1) string.Create(len, items, callback) when the total length is computable, exactly one allocation, the result itself, written in place with no intermediate buffer at all.
(2) StringBuilder with pre-sized capacity, the constructor's capacity is honoured directly, so you get one chunk plus one final copy in ToString().
(3) StringBuilder without a capacity, starts at 16 chars and links additional chunks as it fills; more allocations than (2), but still linear in the output and, crucially, it never re-copies what it already holds.
For genuine variable-length building with conditional appends, StringBuilder is the right choice; if you find yourself quoting a multiplier between these three, measure it on your data instead.

Cross-Q²: How does C sharp 10's interpolated string $"x = {n}" differ from string.Format("x = {0}", n) ?-- think --

A: string.Format boxes every value-type argument (N boxes) and parses the format string at runtime (C P U cost) before producing the final string.
Get the array part right, because it is the half people overstate:
string.Format has non- params overloads for one, two, and three arguments, and dot NET added a params ReadOnlySpan overload that the compiler stack-allocates beyond that, so no object[] is allocated at any argument count unless you hand it one yourself.
The boxes are the real cost. $"x = {n}" lowers to DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler, a stack-allocated builder that uses pooled char buffers. Zero boxing (it has AppendFormatted(T value) generic methods, jit-specialized per T ). Zero format-string parsing (the layout is compile-time-known).
One final allocation: the result string. Now the part to get right, because it is the most commonly repeated error about this feature: that short-circuiting does not apply to ILogger.
Microsoft.Extensions.Logging has no interpolated-string-handler overload, the proposal to add one (dotnet or runtime #111283) was closed as not planned, so _logger.LogDebug($".") builds and allocates the string before the logger ever sees it,
and additionally destroys the message template that structured sinks rely on.
The BCL A P Is that do take a handler and can therefore skip the work are StringBuilder.Append / AppendLine, MemoryExtensions.TryWrite (dot NET 6) and Utf8.TryWrite (dot NET 8). For logging, the answer is the message-template overload or [LoggerMessage], and CA2254 is the analyzer that enforces it.

-- pause --
Drill 13, string.Create versus StringBuilder.

Q: When does string.Create beat StringBuilder ?-- think --

A: When you know the final length ahead of time. string.Create allocates the result string once and gives you a Span to write into, one allocation, total. StringBuilder always costs at least two: its buffer plus the final string produced by ToString().

Be careful how you describe StringBuilder 's buffer, because the usual description is wrong and an interviewer who has read CoreLib will notice. It is not a single char[] that doubles and copies. It is a linked list of chunks, m_ChunkChars for the current buffer, m_ChunkPrevious for the one before.
When a chunk fills, ExpandByABlock allocates a new one and relinks; the source comment describes this as "a few O(1) reference adjustments", and existing characters are never re-copied.
New chunks are sized max(needed, min(current Length, MaxChunkSize)) with MaxChunkSize = 8000 chars, a cap the source says exists "so we stay in the small object heap", since 8,000 chars is 16,000 bytes, well under the 85,000-byte LOH threshold.
So StringBuilder is engineered to keep its own buffers off the LOH; the string it finally produces is a single allocation and can land there regardless.

Cross-Q: Walk me through a real string.Create example.-- think --

A:
csharp.
// Building "Hello, {name}!", total length is known: 9 + name.Length.
string greeting = string.Create(9 + name.Length, name, (chars, state) goes to.
{.
"Hello, ".AsSpan().CopyTo(chars);
state.AsSpan().CopyTo(chars[7.]);
chars[7 + state.Length] = '!';
});

The state parameter avoids the lambda capturing name (which would allocate a closure). The lambda receives Span over the new string's storage, you write the characters directly, no intermediate buffer.

Cross-Q²: What's the catch with string.Create ?-- think --

A: Three. (1) You must compute the final length exactly, write past chars.Length and you get an IndexOutOfRangeException; write less and the string has uninitialized chars at the end. (2) The callback runs synchronously and cannot async-await, no I O inside.
(3) Captures cost allocation, use the state parameter for any data the callback needs; don't capture outer variables. For unknown lengths or complex logic with conditional content, StringBuilder is still the right tool.
string.Create is the specialist for known-length single-allocation construction.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Boxing count.

Q: int i = 5; object o = i; int j = (int)o;, how many heap allocations?-- think --

A: One. The first assignment object o = i boxes, allocates a small object on the heap, copies the value 5 into it, and stores the reference in o. The cast (int)o is an unbox, copies the value back out of the heap object into the stack-allocated j.
Unboxing doesn't allocate; it reads from existing memory. On x64 that box is a 24-byte object, 16 bytes of header (sync-block index + method-table pointer), 4 bytes of payload, 4 of padding, so the overhead is 20 bytes to carry 4 bytes of data.

Cross-Q: How would I count boxes without running the code?-- think --

A: Three ways. (1) ILSpy / ildasm, look for the box I L opcode; each occurrence is one heap allocation. (2) Roslyn analyzer HAA0601 (heap allocation analyzer), flags suspected boxes at compile time. (3) BenchmarkDotNet [MemoryDiagnoser], measure Allocated column on a [Benchmark].
For a method that should be allocation-free but reports 24+ bytes per call, there's a hidden box. The fix is usually adding a generic constraint or calling the struct's method directly instead of through an interface.

Cross-Q²: Where do enum boxes happen, and is dot NET 9 better than dot NET Framework 4.8 here?-- think --

A: Three classic enum-boxing spots, and be precise about which ones modern dot NET actually fixed. (1) string.Format("{0}", my Enum) boxes, the parameter is object and always was. (2) Console.WriteLine(my Enum) binds the object overload, boxes.
(3) my Enum.ToString() still boxes the receiver in I L, because ToString is inherited from System.Enum, which is a class, and enum types don't override it; a constrained. call to a method the value type doesn't implement boxes.
What modern dot NET improved is (a) the implementation of Enum.ToString and the generic helpers, Enum.GetName(value), IsDefined, GetValues arrived in dot NET 5 and take the value generically, so no box at the call;
(b) $"{my Enum}", which lowers to the handler's generic AppendFormatted(T) and so doesn't box the argument;
and (c) on dot NET 9+, the jit can stack-allocate a box that provably doesn't escape, which can make the remaining box free, but that is an optimisation with no guarantee, not a language change.
The honest one-liner: the way to avoid an enum box is to keep it in a generic T or a strongly-typed parameter and never let it reach an object.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Boxing in generic methods.

Q: void Compare(T a, T b) where T: IComparable { a.CompareTo(b); }, does this box?-- think --

A: No. The constraint where T: IComparable tells the jit that any concrete T it specializes for implements IComparable. When T is a value type, the jit generates a specialized method body that calls T.CompareTo(T) directly, a non-virtual method call on the struct, no box.
When T is a reference type, the call is via the interface, but reference types don't box. This is the single most important reason List exists and ArrayList is dead.

Cross-Q: What if I remove the constraint? void Compare(T a, T b) { ((IComparable)a).CompareTo(b); }.-- think --

A: Boxes, for value types. The cast (IComparable)a boxes a to the interface type. The jit specializes the generic but can't prove T implements the interface at compile time, so it must use a runtime cast that allocates.
Two changes restore zero-box: (1) add the constraint, as shown; or (2) keep no constraint but accept the box (rarely the right answer).

Cross-Q²: I see where T: IComparable in a method, and inside it I do object o = a;. Does that box?-- think --

A: Yes, it boxes for value-type T. The constraint prevents boxing on interface method calls ( a.CompareTo(b) is direct), but assignment to object is a separate operation, the runtime must produce a reference-typed value, which requires boxing the struct.
Rule: constraints solve boxing on calls through the constraint; they don't solve boxing on assignments to object or to broader interface types. To avoid the box, keep the value in T form and use other constraint-call sites; don't widen to object.

-- pause --
Drill 16, Server versus Workstation garbage collector.

Q: A S P dot NET Core defaults to which garbage collector mode, and why?-- think --

A: Server garbage collector, but say why it's the default rather than quoting a C P U count, because the mechanism is what's being probed. Microsoft's docs put it as: workstation garbage collector "is the default garbage collector flavor for standalone apps.
For hosted apps, for example, those hosted by A S P dot NET, the host determines the default garbage collector flavor." Server garbage collector creates one heap and one dedicated garbage collector thread per logical C P U and collects them in parallel,
which raises allocation throughput (per-C P U heaps mean near-zero contention on the allocation path) and shortens individual pauses.
The trade-off is a larger memory footprint, because each heap carries its own allocation budget.
There's one hard rule underneath all of this: "Workstation garbage collection is always used on a computer that has only one logical C P U, regardless of the configuration setting." So on a 1-vCPU container, ServerGarbageCollection set to true is silently a no-op.

Cross-Q: I'm running A S P dot NET Core in a 256 megabytes Kubernetes pod. Should I still use Server garbage collector?-- think --

A: Two separate mechanisms are in play and the version gate matters. (1) The heap hard limit. In a memory-limited environment the runtime treats the container limit as total physical memory and defaults the managed heap to the larger of 20 megabytes and 75% of it.
That's System.garbage collector.HeapHardLimitPercent; you can lower it, and you should if the process holds a lot of native memory, because the remaining 25% is the budget for everything that isn't the managed heap.
(2) DATAS, which makes the number of heaps and the gen 0 budget track the application's live data rather than the C P U count.
DATAS was introduced in dot NET 8 and is enabled by default from dot NET 9, so on a current runtime you are already running it, and the realistic experiment is turning it off ( DOTNET_GCDynamicAdaptationMode set to 0 ) if a throughput-sensitive service regressed on upgrade.
The honest answer to the question as asked is: measure both, in your topology, with your traffic, and know that on dot NET 9+ "should I enable DATAS" is already answered for you.

Cross-Q²: How do I verify which garbage collector mode my process is actually running?-- think --

A: System.Runtime.GCSettings.IsServerGC returns true or false at runtime. Also GCSettings.LatencyMode tells you Interactive, Batch, LowLatency, et cetera
For an external check: dotnet-counters monitor System.Runtime shows garbage collector stats; the heap size and Gen 2 collection cadence will look very different on Server versus Workstation.
If you're suspicious of a misconfiguration (for example, runtimeconfig.json deployed wrong), IsServerGC is the first thing to log at startup.

-- pause --
Drill 17, garbage collector.Collect().

Q: When should you call garbage collector.Collect() in production code?-- think --

A: Almost never. The garbage collector is significantly smarter than any manual heuristic, it monitors allocation rate, segment fullness, and survival rates to decide when to collect. Forcing a collection wastes C P U and disrupts the garbage collector's tuning.
garbage collector.Collect() in a hot path is a code smell that always loses on a benchmark.

Cross-Q: Are there any legitimate cases?-- think --

A: Two. (1) After a known one-time large allocation phase, for example, loading a 500 megabytes cache at app startup, then never allocating that much again.
One garbage collector.Collect(2, GCCollectionMode.Forced, blocking: true, compacting: true) at the end of the load phase compacts the heap into a clean steady-state shape.
(2) Benchmarking, bringing the heap to a known state between iterations of a micro-benchmark. Both cases are rare and explicit.

Cross-Q²: What does garbage collector.Collect(2, GCCollectionMode.Forced, blocking: true, compacting: true) mean parameter-by-parameter?-- think --

A: (a) 2, collect up to and including Gen 2 (so all generations + LOH). (b) GCCollectionMode.Forced, actually perform the collection now (alternatives: Default = let garbage collector decide if collection is warranted; Optimized = collect only if there's likely a benefit).
(c) blocking: true, wait for the collection to complete before returning (versus background async). (d) compacting: true, include LOH compaction (normally LOH is non-compacting).
Combined: "synchronously perform a full collection of all generations including LOH compaction, right now." Maximum disruption, maximum reclamation. Use only in the bootstrap scenarios.

-- pause --
Drill 18, BenchmarkDotNet [MemoryDiagnoser].

Q: What does [MemoryDiagnoser] add to a BenchmarkDotNet report?-- think --

A: Three columns: Allocated (bytes per call, the headline number), and Gen 0 / Gen 1 / Gen 2 (collection counts per 1000 ops). It runs each benchmark twice, once for time measurement, once with allocation tracking enabled (which adds overhead, so it's separated).
The result is per-call attribution of how much garbage your method generates and which generations are affected.

Cross-Q: I see Method A: 100 nanoseconds, 0 B; Method B: 80 nanoseconds, 24 B. Which is faster in production?-- think --

A: Likely A, even though B has a lower per-call mean. The 24 B or op on the hot path becomes Gen 0 pressure: at 1M ops or sec, that's 24 megabytes per second of allocations, triggering Gen 0 every few hundred milliseconds.
Each Gen 0 briefly pauses all threads; under load the pause amortizes into worse p99 or p999 latency even though average latency is fine. A's 0 B or op contributes zero to garbage collector.
Senior rule: micro-benchmarks measure C P U; production performance is C P U + garbage collector + cache + tail-latency.
Always include [MemoryDiagnoser] and weigh allocations alongside time.

Cross-Q²: What are the two most common BenchmarkDotNet pitfalls?-- think --

A: (1) Dead-code elimination, a benchmark that returns void and has no observable side effect gets optimized to nothing by the jit, reporting 0 nanoseconds. Fix: always return the computed value from the benchmark method; BDN consumes it to force evaluation.
(2) Running in Debug mode or under a debugger, disables tier-2 jit optimizations, giving meaningless numbers. BDN warns about both at startup.
Honorable mention: [Params] cardinality explosion, the run count is the product of every parameter's cardinality, every [Benchmark] method, and every job, so [Params(1, 10, 100, 1000)] across 4 benchmarks and 3 runtimes is 48 full measurement runs.
Tune your parameter set deliberately; each run pays its own pilot, warmup and workload phases.

-- pause --
Drill 19, Closure allocations.

Q: var n = 5; Func f = () goes to n * 2;, how many allocations?-- think --

A: Two objects, so two allocations. The lambda captures the local n, so the compiler generates a display class ( <>c__DisplayClass. ), a heap object holding n as a field and a method returning n * 2. Then the Func itself is a delegate object whose target is that display-class instance.
Say "one display class and one delegate" rather than quoting byte counts; the sizes follow from object layout and the delegate's field count, and the number of objects is what the interviewer is checking.
Note also that the display class is per scope, not per lambda, every lambda in the same scope shares one, which is how a lambda that captures one int can end up keeping a large object alive.

Cross-Q: How do I write a closure-free version?-- think --

A: Three approaches, in the order you should try them. (1) Capture nothing, pass the value as a parameter instead: Func f = static n goes to n 2; then call f(5). Roslyn caches a non-capturing lambda's delegate in a static field, so it is allocated once for the life of the process.
Marking it static (C sharp 9) makes accidental capture a compile error, which is the real value, it survives the next person editing the body. (2) Method group, static int Double(int n) goes to n 2; Func f = Double;. (3) Use a state-passing overload where the A P I offers one.
These exist precisely to let you avoid the capture, but you have to check that the specific A P I has one, link's Enumerable methods largely do not, so list.FirstOrDefault(x goes to x.Id == criteria.Id) genuinely does capture.
Ones that do: ConcurrentDictionary.GetOrAdd(key, Func, TArg), string.Create(length, state, SpanAction), ThreadPool.QueueUserWorkItem(Action, TState, bool), CancellationToken.Register(Action, object?).

Cross-Q²: How do I detect closure allocations in production code?-- think --

A: Three tools. (1) Roslyn analyzer HAA0301-302 (Heap Allocation Analyzer), flags lambdas that capture variables and warns about closure allocation. (2) [MemoryDiagnoser] benchmarks, if a method that should be allocation-free reports 56+ bytes per call, there's likely a closure.
(3) PerfView allocation trace, search for compiler-generated <>c__DisplayClass* types; each one is a closure. The most common offenders: link in hot paths ( .Where(x goes to x.Id == my Id) captures my Id ), event handlers that capture state, and lambda parameters to async methods.

-- pause --
Drill 20, ref returns.

Q: What's a real-world use of ref returns?-- think --

A: Dictionary in-place update via CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef. The typical "find-or-add" pattern costs two dictionary lookups, TryGetValue, then [key] =., each of which hashes the key and probes a bucket chain.
GetValueRefOrNullRef does one lookup and returns a ref TValue pointing at the entry, which you mutate in place.
Two savings, and they scale differently: the second hash-and-probe is a fixed saving, while for a large TValue struct you also stop copying the value out and back in, which grows with sizeof(TValue).
GetValueRefOrAddDefault(dict, key, out bool existed) (dot NET 6) covers the insert case in the same single lookup.

Cross-Q: Show me the code.-- think --

A:
csharp.
using System.Runtime.InteropServices;

var counts = new Dictionary();
ref int slot = ref CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef(counts, "alice");
if (Unsafe.IsNullRef(ref slot)).
counts["alice"] = 1; // first time, add via normal path.
else.
slot++; // direct mutation, no second lookup.

Unsafe.IsNullRef(ref slot) checks whether the dictionary returned a "not found" marker (a null ref). On hit, slot++ writes through the ref directly into the dictionary's internal bucket.

Cross-Q²: Why is this only available in dot NET 6+? Wasn't ref return added in C sharp 7?-- think --

A: C sharp 7 (2017) added ref returns and ref locals, the language feature. But the BCL didn't expose ref returns from Dictionary because of safety: a ref to a dictionary slot becomes invalid if the dictionary resizes (the backing array is reallocated).
Exposing the ref via the normal A P I surface would let callers hold dangling refs.
dot NET 6 (2021) added CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef in the System.Runtime.InteropServices namespace, explicitly opt-in, the name signals "you're crossing into unsafe territory, you take responsibility for not resizing the dictionary while holding the ref".
Similar gating exists for CollectionsMarshal.AsSpan(List), span over the list's backing array, invalidated by Add.

-- pause --
Drill 21, Do value types live on the stack?.

Q: Value types live on the stack and reference types live on the heap. True?-- think --

A: No, that's a statement about types, and the real rule is about storage locations. A value type's bytes live wherever its storage lives.
As a method local it may be in a register or the stack frame; as a field of a class it lives inside that heap object; as an array element it lives inside the array on the heap; captured by a lambda it lives in the display class on the heap;
alive across an await it ends up in the state-machine object once the method suspends; boxed, it lives in a heap object of its own.
And the converse fails too, since dot NET 9 or 10, escape analysis lets the jit satisfy a reference-type new on the stack when it can prove the object doesn't escape. The formulation that holds up: the stack is an implementation detail.
What the language guarantees is copy semantics (assignment copies the value) and lifetime (reclaimed with whatever contains it), not placement.

Cross-Q: Then why does the distinction matter at all for performance?-- think --

A: Because of what it implies about layout and indirection, not about which region the bytes are in.
A struct field inside a class or an array pays no object header, no method-table pointer and no per-element dereference, on x64 that's 16 bytes of overhead avoided per element, against a 24-byte minimum object size, plus the difference between a sequential scan and a pointer chase.
It also means no write barrier on stores, and no array covariance check. Those are the reasons Point[] beats Point_asClass[] in a loop, and none of them is "the stack is faster than the heap".

Cross-Q²: I have a recursive parser that works in tests and kills the process in production. Where do I look?-- think --

A: At the stack the code is actually running on, which is different in the two environments.
A thread's stack is a fixed reservation made at creation: on Windows it comes from the reservation in the executable's PE header (1 megabyte by default); on Linux the main thread's comes from ulimit -s, commonly 8 megabytes, and CoreCLR uses a smaller fixed default on Alpine or musl.
Tests typically run on a main or test-host thread; an A S P dot NET Core request runs on a thread-pool thread whose stack size you cannot configure, with the middleware pipeline already some hundreds of frames deep. So the same input has far less headroom in production.
DOTNET_DefaultStackSize (hex) raises the default for runtime-created threads and new Thread(work, maxStackSize) sets it for one you own, but neither is the right fix:
a stack overflow is not a catchable exception, so the fix is a depth limit that returns a 400, plus moving any large buffers out of stackalloc and into the pool.

-- pause --
Drill 22, Diagnose a managed memory leak.

Q: A service's memory climbs steadily over a week and the pod is restarted to fix it. How do you find the cause?-- think --

A: First separate the two failures, because they need different tools. If GCMemoryInfo.HeapSizeBytes (or dotnet gc last collection heap size ) is climbing, it's managed retention and everything applies.
If the managed heap is flat while the working set climbs, it's native memory and none of it will help. Assuming managed: dotnet-gcdump collect -p twice, spaced apart under comparable load, and diff the two in Visual Studio or PerfView.
The diff, not a single dump, is what identifies the growing type, because a healthy heap also contains millions of objects. Then take one instance of that type into dotnet-dump analyze and run gcroot, which prints the reference path back to a root. That path is the answer.

Cross-Q: What are the roots it could end at, and which one is it usually?-- think --

A: The root set is: live locals on any thread's stack (or in registers), static fields and [ThreadStatic] slots, garbage collector handles ( Normal, Pinned, and the weak variants), objects in the finalization queue awaiting their finalizer, and runtime-internal structures.
In application code it is nearly always a static: a cache with no eviction, or, the one that hides best, an event. publisher.Changed += handler puts a strong reference to the subscriber into the publisher's invocation list, so a singleton publisher roots every scoped subscriber that ever attached.
Runners-up: a Timer or CancellationToken.Register callback holding a closure, and an ArrayPool of reference type returned with clear Array: false, where the pool itself becomes the root.

Cross-Q²: The gcroot path ends at a static ConcurrentDictionary. Is that a leak?-- think --

A: Probably not, and saying so is the point. In a managed process there is no leak in the C sense; there is unintended retention, and a static cache is retention working exactly as written.
The diagnostic question is "if the load stops, does memory come back down?" If yes, it's live working set, not a leak.
If no, the cache is unbounded and the fix is a policy, not a missing Remove: MemoryCache with a size limit and SetSize on entries, an LRU, or a WeakReference / ConditionalWeakTable if the value should die with something else.
A genuine leak, a reference nobody intended to keep, is fixed by dropping the reference; unbounded retention is fixed by deciding what you're willing to keep. Getting the classification right is what stops a team from "fixing" a cache by deleting it.

-- pause --
Drill 23, Throughput falls as you add threads.

Q: A parallel aggregation scales from one thread to two, stops improving at four, and gets slower at eight. There is no lock and no shared mutable state except a long[] of per-worker counters. What's happening?-- think --

A: False sharing. Cache coherency operates on cache lines, not variables, 64 bytes on x64, and CoreLib's PaddingHelpers.CACHE_LINE_SIZE is 128 on ARM64. Eight long s is 64 bytes, so all eight counters sit within one or two lines.
Every worker's write invalidates the line in every other core's cache, and the line ping-pongs between cores. The threads share no data; they share a line. It reads as a scaling ceiling rather than contention because there is nothing to show up in a lock-contention profile.

Cross-Q: How do you fix it?-- think --

A: Two options, and prefer the first. (1) Stop sharing the line: each worker accumulates into a plain local and does one Interlocked.Add (or one write under its own lock) at the end of its batch.
This removes both the false sharing and the atomic operation from the hot loop, and it needs no knowledge of cache-line size.
(2) Pad, if the shared write genuinely cannot be batched, which is what ConcurrentQueue does internally: PaddedHeadAndTail is [StructLayout(LayoutKind.Explicit, Size = 3 * CACHE_LINE_SIZE)] with Head and Tail at separate line offsets, padded before, between and after.
Note where the BCL chose to spend that memory: on the two hottest concurrently-written fields of a lock-free queue, and essentially nowhere else. That's the calibration to carry, padding is a last resort, not a habit.

Cross-Q²: Same aggregation, but now the slow part is a single-threaded pass over a million records and it allocates nothing. Where does the time go?-- think --

A: Memory latency, most likely, and the shape of the data is the reason.
If the records are a List where Record is a class, the list holds a million 8-byte references, each pointing at a separate heap object of at least 24 bytes, at whatever address the allocator produced, so the loop is a pointer chase the prefetcher cannot predict,
and each element access is a potential cache miss.
The same data as a Record[] of readonly record struct is one contiguous block: sequential access, no per-object headers, no indirection, and no write barrier on stores.
Before converting, check the struct conditions, small, immutable, value-like, not used polymorphically, because if the type is passed through layers instead of computed over, you trade cache misses for the copies described in the defensive-copy section.
The honest closing line is that this is a hypothesis you confirm with a profiler that reports cache misses, not with a stopwatch.

-- pause --
Section 7. Cheat Sheet.

garbage collector generations: Gen 0 (microseconds, frequent); Gen 2 + LOH (milliseconds, rare, but spikes p99).
LOH threshold: at least 85,000 B goes to LOH (treated like Gen 2, non-compacting by default).
POH (dot NET 5+): garbage collector.AllocateArray(len, pinned: true), for long-lived interop buffers.
Server garbage collector: default for A S P dot NET Core with at least 2 CPUs; per-C P U heaps; high throughput, more RAM.
Span: ref struct view; zero alloc; can't cross await or be a class field.
ReadOnlySpan: read-only view; string.AsSpan() and UTF-8 literals ( "abc"u8 ).
Memory: heap-storable cousin; safe to await; .Span to actually access.
stackalloc Span: fixed-size on stack; cap at ~1 kilobyte; never in a loop; clamp size from input.
ArrayPool.Shared.Rent + Return: variable-sized buffers; pass clear Array: true for PII.
ValueTask: hot-path synchronous completion saves Task alloc; await once, no concurrent.
readonly struct: eliminates defensive copies on in parameters and ref-readonly access.
in parameter: pass-by-reference for big structs; pair with readonly struct to avoid defensive copies.
ref T returns: CollectionsMarshal.GetValueRefOrNullRef(dict, key), one lookup instead of two.
IDisposable: needed for any owned resource; finalizer only if owning raw unmanaged IntPtr (prefer SafeHandle ).
IAsyncDisposable: when cleanup itself does I O; pair with await using.
string.Create(len, state, span goes to.): single-alloc string when length known; beats StringBuilder.
DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler (C sharp 10): $"." rents its scratch buffer from ArrayPool.Shared; one allocation, the result. ILogger has no handler overload, LogDebug($".") allocates even when the level is off, and loses the message template. Use templates or [LoggerMessage]; CA2254 catches it.
Handler-taking A P Is that really do skip the work: StringBuilder.Append / AppendLine, MemoryExtensions.TryWrite (dot NET 6), Utf8.TryWrite (dot NET 8).
UTF-8 literal: "text"u8 is ReadOnlySpan, no allocation, no encode.
Boxing checklist: any cast to object / interface, generic without constraint, ArrayList, checks via I L box opcode.
garbage collector.Collect(): almost never; only after one-time bulk loads or in benchmark setup.
BenchmarkDotNet + [MemoryDiagnoser]: measure Allocated column, return the value to defeat dead-code elimination.
Escape analysis: jit stack-allocates non-escaping objects, boxes (dot NET 9); small fixed-size arrays, local struct fields, delegates (dot NET 10).
Write barrier: emitted on every reference store into a heap field; marks a card so young GCs can skip old generations.
Regions (dot NET 7+): 4 megabytes SOH, 8 times for UOH; a big reserved virtual range is normal and is not memory in use.
LOH threshold is configurable upward: System.garbage collector.LOHThreshold / DOTNET_GCLOHThreshold (dot NET Core 3.0+).
Container heap limit: default = max(20 megabytes, 75% of the cgroup limit). HighMemoryPercent default 90%. DATAS on by default from dot NET 9.
1 logical C P U implies Workstation garbage collector, regardless of ServerGarbageCollection.
ArrayPool contract: Rent gives at least n and may be uninitialized; Return needs the exact bucket length or throws; reference-type arrays need clear Array: true or the pool holds them alive; double-return is a documented security issue.
ObjectPool + IResettable.TryReset(): pools objects, bounds what it retains not what it allocates, and returning is optional.
SearchValues (dot NET 8; SearchValues dot NET 9, Ordinal or OrdinalIgnoreCase only): build once into a static readonly, then IndexOfAny / ContainsAny.
StringBuilder is a chunk list, not a doubling array, MaxChunkSize 8,000 chars, deliberately kept under the LOH threshold.
Production garbage collector A P Is: garbage collector.GetTotalAllocatedBytes(), GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread(), GetTotalPauseDuration() (dot NET 7+), GetGCMemoryInfo(); System.Runtime Meter (dot NET 9+).
dotnet-counters syntax: --counters System.Runtime[dotnet gc collections,dotnet gc pause time], provider name required.
C sharp 14: implicit conversions among T[], Span, ReadOnlySpan; can shift overload resolution.
Stack versus heap: storage location decides, not the type. Field to in the object; element to in the array; captured to in the display class; across await to in the state-machine box.
Thread stacks: 1 megabyte PE-header default on Windows; ulimit -s on Linux; DOTNET_DefaultStackSize (hex) to override; new Thread(work, maxStackSize); no per-work-item control on the thread pool.
Collection growth: List = shared empty array to 4 to doubling, capped at Array.MaxLength. Dictionary or HashSet resize to the next prime and rehash. EnsureCapacity: Dictionary or HashSet dot NET Core 2.1, List or Stack or Queue dot NET 6.
Array.Empty() instead of new T[0]; List with no items allocates only the list object.
Roots: thread stacks + registers, statics / [ThreadStatic], garbage collector handles, the finalization queue, runtime internals. dotnet-gcdump times 2 + diff, then gcroot.
Weak: WeakReference (short by default; track Resurrection: true = long), ConditionalWeakTable (weak key, value alive with it), DependentHandle (dot NET 6+, System.Runtime ).
garbage collector.KeepAlive goes at the end of the range, for objects only native code still uses. Liveness is what the jit can prove, not your braces.
GCSettings.LatencyMode: LowLatency workstation-only; SustainedLowLatency needs background garbage collector, bigger heap, more fragmentation; NoGCRegion is read-only.
garbage collector.TryStartNoGCRegion(n) returns bool, commits 2 times n on the single-arg overload, can't nest, at most ephemeral segment size. Guard EndNoGCRegion() on the current latency mode.
garbage collector.AddMemoryPressure / RemoveMemoryPressure: for native memory freed only by a finalizer; remove exactly what you add.
Object layout (x64): 8-byte header slot + 8-byte method-table pointer, 24-byte minimum. Unsafe.SizeOf() for managed size; Marshal.SizeOf() is the marshalled size.
Layout defaults: structs Sequential, classes Auto. Field order matters for structs; [StructLayout(LayoutKind.Auto)] opts a struct into runtime reordering.
Reference-array stores pay a covariance check ( ArrayTypeMismatchException ) plus a write barrier; struct-array stores pay neither.
Cache line 64 B (128 B on ARM64 in CoreLib's PaddingHelpers ). False sharing = throughput falls as threads increase, with no lock in sight. Fix by not sharing the line.
ISpanFormattable (dot NET 6) / IUtf8SpanFormattable (dot NET 8): TryFormat into a caller's buffer, what makes the whole zero-allocation chain work at the leaves.
[MemoryDiagnoser]: garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread, separate iteration set, benchmark thread only, managed only. BDN warmup or iteration counts are adaptive (6, 50 / 15, 100).
Heuristic: hot path to check Allocated column to swap to span or pool until 0 B or op.

-- pause --
Section 8. Walkthrough, Gen 2 pressure from string concat.

Problem: An order-export endpoint generates large CSV files.
During exports, full (Gen 2) collections become frequent, and p99 latency spikes on unrelated endpoints, the classic signature of a noisy neighbour inside your own process, because a stop-the-world pause doesn't care which request caused it.

Diagnosis, in the order you'd actually do it:

Confirm it's garbage collector, not C P U.
dotnet-counters monitor -p --counters System.Runtime[dotnet gc collections,dotnet gc pause time,dotnet gc heap total allocated] (on dot NET 9+; on dot NET 8 and earlier the same tool falls back to the EventCounter names gen-2-gc-count, time-in-gc, alloc-rate ).
Rising gen 2 count and rising pause time that track export volume is the confirmation.
Find what's allocating. dotnet-trace collect --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:0x1:5,Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler -p, then PerfView's Allocation View.
The report is dominated by System.String, in sizes ranging from small up to very large, a size distribution that climbs is itself the clue, because it means one logical string is being rebuilt at growing lengths.
Read the code that matches the shape. csv += $"{order.Id},{order.Total},{order.CustomerName}\n"; inside the per-row loop. Each += allocates a string the size of everything written so far and copies it.
Bytes allocated grow with the square of the row count, and past ~42,500 characters every intermediate is a large object allocated straight into the LOH, which is collected only with Gen 2, which is why an export endpoint became a latency problem for the whole service.

Fix: never materialize the document. Stream it to the response as it is produced.

Why it works, three distinct mechanisms, and being able to separate them is the point of the walkthrough:

The quadratic copying disappears. A buffered writer appends; it never re-copies what it already wrote. Bytes allocated become linear in the output instead of quadratic.
Nothing crosses the LOH threshold. The writer's buffer is a fixed 64 kilobytes, under 85,000 bytes, so the export stops contributing to Gen 2 at all.
Peak working set stops tracking file size. The whole document is never resident, so the endpoint's memory profile is flat regardless of how many rows the customer asked for, which also removes the input-driven failure mode where a bigger export means a bigger outage.

How you'd verify, rather than assert: re-run the same dotnet-counters view during an export and compare gen 2 count and dotnet gc pause time against the baseline captured in step 1. That before or after pair is the deliverable; a claimed speedup with no baseline is not.

-- pause --
Section 9. Self-test.

Span holds a managed pointer ( byref ) into memory that may be on the stack, heap, or native, it's a ref struct to enforce stack-only lifetime. A class field would let the span outlive its backing memory (for example, stackalloc after the frame returns), the compiler refuses to prevent this.
For async methods, the compiler lowers them into a state machine class and hoists into fields every local that is live across a suspension point; a Span held across the await would become such a field, which is CS4007.
Since C sharp 13 the declaration of a Span local in an async method is legal, only crossing the await is not, while a ref struct parameter remains an outright error (CS4012).
Workaround: store Memory (heap-storable) on the field or parameter, and inside synchronous regions call .Span to do the actual work.

(1) Interpolated string $"{a}-{b}": lowers to DefaultInterpolatedStringHandler, whose scratch buffer is rented from ArrayPool.Shared, so the result string is the only lasting allocation, and no boxing, because AppendFormatted is generic.
(2) string.Create: string.Create(a.Length + b.Length + 1, (a, b), (span, state) goes to.), single allocation, no intermediate object[].
(3) Utf8.TryWrite(destination, $"{a}-{b}") into a pooled or stack byte span if downstream is binary, zero allocations, because the handler writes straight into your buffer and no string is created.
The classic string.Format boxes each value-type argument and runs format-string parsing every call, the modern alternatives skip both costs.
What it does not do is allocate an object[]: the two-argument call binds to the non- params Format(string, object, object) overload, and beyond three arguments the compiler picks the params ReadOnlySpan overload and stack-allocates the span. Quote the boxes, not the array.
(Full measured ledger in Type System, Boxing and unboxing.) One thing not to say: that interpolation is free when the result is discarded. That only holds for A P Is with an interpolated-string-handler parameter, and ILogger is not one of them.

stackalloc is unbeatable for small ( at most ~1 kilobyte), known-size, single-frame buffers, zero allocation, zero garbage collector, automatic reclaim on return.
Loses when (a) size is large or unknown, stack exhaustion is not a catchable StackOverflowException in modern dot NET, it is immediate process termination with no finally, no log flush and no dump; (b) the buffer must outlive the method;
(c) it is used in a loop, the lifetime is the enclosing method, so each iteration adds to the frame and nothing is reclaimed until the method returns ( CA2014 flags this).
ArrayPool.Rent(size) handles arbitrary sizes and survives across async boundaries, but pays rent or return overhead, requires the exact array back, and quietly loses its benefit if a Return is missed.
Rule: at most ~1 kilobyte and bounded by a constant on the stack; anything derived from input, or anything crossing an await, goes to the pool.

Likely A, even though B is faster per call. The 24 B or op on the hot path becomes Gen 0 pressure: at 1M ops or sec, that's 24 megabytes per second of allocations, triggering Gen 0 collections every few hundred milliseconds.
Each collection pauses all threads briefly; under load, the pause amortizes into worse p99 or p999 even if avg latency improves. The 0 B or op method has no garbage collector contribution.
Senior rule: micro-benchmarks measure C P U; production performance is C P U + garbage collector + cache + tail-latency.
Always include [MemoryDiagnoser] and weigh allocations.

Stack overflow waiting to happen. stackalloc doesn't bounds-check against the remaining stack, a malicious or buggy size of 10 megabytes blows the thread stack, killing the process (no OutOfMemoryException, just immediate termination).
Two fixes: (1) clamp the stackalloc size and fall back to pooled array: Span buffer = size .Shared.Rent(size);, note the rented array must be returned in finally. (2) Always use ArrayPool for sizes derived from input. The pattern size <= threshold?
stackalloc: pool.Rent is the dot NET BCL standard idiom, see Utf8JsonReader source.

(1) As a field of a class, class Node { Point P; } puts P 's eight bytes inside Node 's heap object; there is no separate stack copy. (2) As an array element, Point[] pts is one contiguous heap block of Point s, no headers and no indirection per element.
(3) Captured by a lambda, the local is hoisted into a compiler-generated display class on the heap and stops being a stack slot at all; the same happens to any local that lives across an await, which ends up in the state-machine object once the method suspends.
And boxing makes a fourth: object o = p copies the bytes into a heap object with a header. The formulation to give an interviewer: a value type lives wherever its storage location lives; the language guarantees copy semantics and lifetime, not placement. "The stack is an implementation detail."

First classify: if GCMemoryInfo.HeapSizeBytes / dotnet gc last collection heap size is growing it is managed retention; if the managed heap is flat while the working set climbs, it is native memory and none of the managed tooling applies.
For managed: dotnet-gcdump collect -p twice, spaced under comparable load, and diff them, the delta names the type that grew, where a single dump cannot. Then dotnet-dump analyze on a full dump and gcroot on one instance of that type, which prints the path back to a root.
Roots are: live locals on any thread, statics and [ThreadStatic], garbage collector handles, the finalization queue, runtime internals.
In application code the answer is usually a static, and the sneakiest static is an event, because += stores a strong reference to the subscriber inside the publisher.
Last step: classify again. If load stopping brings memory down, it was working set; if not and the root is an unbounded cache, the fix is an eviction policy, not a missing Remove.

Ask three questions before accepting it. (1) Which thread? [MemoryDiagnoser] measures with garbage collector.GetAllocatedBytesForCurrentThread, so anything the method offloads to the thread pool is invisible; a method whose body is Task.Run(.) can report 0 B while allocating more than before.
(2) Which memory?
It counts managed allocation only, stackalloc, NativeMemory.Alloc, buffers held by a native library, and anything served from a warm ArrayPool all read as zero.
0 B means "asked the garbage collector for nothing", which is exactly the claim a pooled implementation makes, and it is compatible with a leaked rental.
(3) Which size? Allocation that scales with input is invisible in a single- N benchmark; parameterise on size, and include one 85,000 bytes if buffers are involved, because that is where the answer changes character.
Then the follow-up that decides whether any of it matters: what fraction of a request does this method account for?