-- pause --
Section 1. Interview Cross-Questioning Drill.

️ Honest caveat: reading this once doesn't make you interview-ready. Cover the answers, write them cold, then check. Pair with a senior for live mock cross-questioning. The guide removes "I never thought about that" surprises; mock interviews convert knowledge into reflex. Both are needed.

Each drill is Q to A to Cross-Q to A to Cross-Q² to A.

-- pause --
Drill 1, URL versus header versus media-type versioning.

Q: Compare URL, header, and media-type versioning. Which would you pick and why?-- think --

A: URL versioning ( /v2 or orders ) is the practical default, visible in logs, browser-testable, easy to route at the gateway, supported by every H T T P client. Header versioning ( X-A P I-Version: 2 ) keeps URLs clean but is invisible to humans browsing logs or pasting curl.
Media-type versioning ( Accept: application or vnd.acme.v2+json ) is the most RESTful by purist standards, same resource identity across versions, but operations teams hate it because you can't grep request logs by version.

Cross-Q: Stripe famously uses a non-URL approach, dated version snapshots pinned to the account, overridable per request ( Stripe-Version: YYYY-MM-DD.trainname ). What does that buy them that the URL approach doesn't?-- think --

A: Two things. (1) Per-customer migration cadence: each customer pins their A P I version at integration time; new customers get the current shape; existing customers don't get force-migrated when Stripe ships a new shape.
(2) Many small breaking changes are tolerable because each is one snapshot, not a major-version event, Stripe ships breaking changes monthly without the "v2 launch" drama.
The cost: server must maintain N parallel response shapes (or transformation layers), and the support burden across versions is higher.

Cross-Q²: Why doesn't every A P I copy Stripe's approach?-- think --

A: Engineering cost. Stripe's versioning system requires transformation layers that turn the latest internal representation into any historical shape, they have a "versioned response" pipeline that's effectively an internal product.
For an A P I with 5 endpoints and 2 clients you control, it's massive overkill. For an A P I with 200 endpoints and 50K third-party integrations, it's the only humane option.
The pattern matches scale; choose URL versioning until you have so many consumers that big-bang major bumps become a customer-support catastrophe.

-- pause --
Drill 2, Breaking versus non-breaking changes.

Q: Give me five changes and rank each as breaking or non-breaking.-- think --

A: (1) Adding an optional field to a response: non-breaking, old clients ignore unknown fields. (2) Adding a required field to a request: breaking, old clients omit it. (3) Renaming a field: breaking in either direction.
(4) Tightening validation (max length 200 to 100): breaking, old clients sending 150-char values now get 400. (5) Adding a new endpoint: non-breaking, nothing in the existing contract changed.

Cross-Q: Counter-intuitive one: adding a field to a response is non-breaking for H T T P clients, but I've seen it break SDKs. How?-- think --

A: Generated typed SDKs with strict deserialization. NSwag-generated C sharp clients sometimes fail on unknown Jason properties depending on configuration; Java or Kotlin with Jackson throws on the new field, because FAIL_ON_UNKNOWN_PROPERTIES is on by default in a plain ObjectMapper.
The "H T T P client perspective" is non-breaking; the "typed S D K perspective" depends on the S D K's deserialization tolerance. Standard practice: SDKs ignore unknown properties by default; ensure your codegen configuration sets that explicitly for downstream confidence.

Cross-Q²: Tightening response validation, say, an enum that previously could be any string and now is one of a closed set, is that breaking?-- think --

A: Yes, subtly. Old responses contained values like "PENDING_OVERRIDE" that clients tolerated as strings. New responses still emit only "PENDING"|"COMPLETE"|"CANCELLED" but old clients have a switch statement assuming the prior set of values and fall through to a default "unknown" case.
The contract narrowed; clients that hard-coded the prior open set now lose information. Treat enum closures as breaking and communicate them in changelogs even if technically "the response is a subset of what we emitted before."

-- pause --
Drill 3, Deprecation headers (RFC 9745 and RFC 8594).

Q: Explain the standard deprecation signaling, Deprecation, Sunset, and Link headers.-- think --

A: Deprecation: @1780272000 (RFC 9745, 2025) communicates "this endpoint or version is on its way out." The value is a structured-field Date per RFC 9651, an @ followed by a Unix timestamp, for the moment deprecation took or takes effect.
Watch for this in interviews: the pre-RFC drafts used Deprecation: true or an H T T P-date, and most material still online shows those. Sunset: (RFC 8594), the date the endpoint will return 410 Gone; this one is an H T T P-date.
Link:; rel="successor-version", the Link field is RFC 8288, the relation type is RFC 5829, points clients at the replacement so they can read the header and route S D K upgrade notifications.
RFC 9745 adds a second relation, rel="deprecation", whose target is the documentation explaining the change rather than the replacement resource. Modern H T T P clients (Axios with interceptors, dot NET DelegatingHandler ) can surface these headers as warnings in dev logs automatically.

Cross-Q: A client integration ignores headers entirely, partner team built their H T T P layer to throw away headers it doesn't understand. Headers are useless against them. What else?-- think --

A: Layered communication.
(1) Per-key telemetry: identify which A P I keys / User-Agent strings still call deprecated endpoints; (2) Proactive outreach: email or Slack the top N consumers a defined number of weeks before sunset, with their specific endpoint usage; (3) Dev portal banner on every page mentioning v1 sunset;
(4) Changelog with prominent deprecation notes per release; (5) Optional brownouts, periodically return 503 for v1 in the final month as a "wake-up call" before the permanent 410.
Headers alone never reach teams who don't read them.

Cross-Q²: A team wants to use Warning header (RFC 7234) for deprecation notices because it predates Deprecation. Tradeoffs?-- think --

A: Warning was deprecated in RFC 9111 (H T T P caching, June 2022) and removed from the modern H T T P semantics specs. Some legacy intermediaries strip or reorder it. The successor pattern is Deprecation + Sunset + Link.
There's no downside to including Warning: 299 - "Deprecated" as a fallback for clients reading older spec, but the primary signal should be the modern triple. Pick the standard with active spec maintenance.

-- pause --
Drill 4, Semver for A P Is.

Q: How does semver (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH) apply to a wire contract?-- think --

A: MAJOR, breaking change (rename, removal, type change, required-field addition), bump and version-prefix the URL. MINOR, backward-compatible additions (new optional field, new endpoint, looser validation), same URL, document in changelog.
PATCH, backward-compatible bug fixes (incorrect data, wrong status code, performance), invisible to consumers. For URL versioning, expose only MAJOR externally ( /v2/ ); track MINOR.PATCH internally for the changelog.

Cross-Q: A team versions their A P I as 2.5.3 in the URL ( /v2.5.3 or orders ). What goes wrong?-- think --

A: Three problems. (1) Bumping MINOR or PATCH changes the URL, forcing client URL updates for non-breaking changes, defeats the point of semver. (2) Caching is fragmented per minor version, same content cached under N URLs.
(3) URL churn breaks bookmark sharing, log analysis ("show me v2.5.x usage" requires regex), and gateway routing config. The discipline: URL captures MAJOR; the running server announces full version in a header like Api-Version: 2.5.3 for diagnostics; changelog tells the story.

Cross-Q²: S D K semver versus A P I semver, when do they diverge?-- think --

A: They almost always diverge. S D K semver tracks the S D K's contract with its language: bumping S D K 4.0.0 might be triggered by an idiomatic refactor (renamed methods, added type-safety) without any underlying A P I change.
Conversely, A P I 2.0.0 launch needs a new S D K version family ( OrdersClient.V2 ), clients can't depend on both v1 and v2 simultaneously without namespacing. Document the mapping explicitly: S D K changelog says "supports A P I v1.x and v2.x; v2 endpoints in OrdersClient.V2 namespace."

-- pause --
Drill 5, Multi-version maintenance scope.

Q: You're maintaining v1 and v2. How do you scope what code is kept and what's deleted?-- think --

A: Three layers. (1) URL routing, /v1 or orders and /v2 or orders exist as separate routes. (2) Controller per version, OrdersControllerV1, OrdersControllerV2, or one controller with [MapToApiVersion] per action.
(3) Shared service layer where business logic is the same; version-specific transformations live in mapping layers ( OrderV1Mapper, OrderV2Mapper ) that translate the shared domain model into the per-version wire format.
Deletion at sunset: remove the controller route and its mapper; the domain model is untouched.

Cross-Q: The business logic changed between v1 and v2, not just shape, but rules ("v1: tax always included; v2: tax separate line item"). Does the shared-service pattern still hold?-- think --

A: Yes, with a versioned domain operation. The domain service exposes CalculateTotal(Order, TaxBehavior) where TaxBehavior is IncludedInPrice (v1) or SeparateLineItem (v2). The v1 controller passes IncludedInPrice; v2 passes SeparateLineItem.
Logic differences become parameters to the domain, not duplicated copies of business logic. Avoid forking the service per version unless the divergence is so deep that they're effectively different products.

Cross-Q²: A junior duplicates OrderService to OrderServiceV2 to make the v2 change. Six months later, a bug fix lands in OrderService but not OrderServiceV2. How do you prevent this trajectory?-- think --

A: Three structural fixes. (1) Architecture test: "no class name ending in V1 or V2 or V3 exists the controllers layer", fail the build. (2) Code review checklist: forking a service requires explicit ADR (Architectural Decision Record) explaining why the parametrize-the-domain approach failed.
(3) Periodic version audit (quarterly): comb the codebase for divergent copies and consolidate or document the divergence reason. The smell is "code duplication driven by versioning, not driven by domain difference."

-- pause --
Drill 6, Adding a field.

Q: Adding a field is sometimes breaking, sometimes non-breaking. Explain when.-- think --

A: To a response: non-breaking, old clients ignore unknown fields. To a request as optional: non-breaking, old clients omit the field; server uses default. To a request as required: breaking, old clients omit, server returns 400.
The direction of data flow and the required or optional flag together determine breakage.

Cross-Q: A team adds an "optional" field to the request but the server treats absence as an error in business logic ("field must be present, even if empty"). Effectively breaking?-- think --

A: Yes, the contract is enforced by behavior, not by schema annotation. If the server rejects requests missing the field, it's a required field whatever you call it in the OpenAPI spec.
The fix is either: (a) make the absence path return a sensible default and document it, or (b) accept that you've introduced a required field and bump the major version. The OpenAPI annotation required: false must match server behavior.

Cross-Q²: Adding an optional response field, when does this break S D K consumers in practice?-- think --

A: Strict deserialization in typed SDKs, but know which ecosystems are actually strict. Jackson is: FAIL_ON_UNKNOWN_PROPERTIES is on by default in a plain ObjectMapper, so an added field throws unless someone disabled it.
Swift's synthesized Codable is tolerant, but a hand-written init(from:) that enumerates keys can be made strict by accident.
System.Text.Json is the counter-example and the one interviewers probe:
it ignores unknown properties by default, and rejecting them is opt-in via JsonSerializerOptions.UnmappedMemberHandling = JsonUnmappedMemberHandling.Disallow (dot NET 8+) or the [JsonUnmappedMemberHandling] attribute on the type.
Don't confuse that with UnknownTypeHandling, which is about how object -typed members deserialize and has nothing to do with extra properties.
Mitigation: document the S D K's tolerance setting and keep codegen permissive, leave UnmappedMemberHandling at its default Skip for dot NET, and explicitly disable FAIL_ON_UNKNOWN_PROPERTIES for Jackson.

-- pause --
Drill 7, Renaming a field.

Q: Renaming a field is the canonical "tiny but breaking" change. Walk through how to evolve.-- think --

A: Three-phase migration. (1) Dual-publish: emit both status and state in responses; accept both on requests. Mark the old name deprecated: true on its property in the OpenAPI schema, that is the signal consumers and codegen actually see.
(2) Wait window: 6+ months of telemetry on usage of the old name. (3) Sunset: announce removal, return 410 or remove the field in a major version bump. Never delete on the day of the rename.

Cross-Q: How do you cleanly emit both status and state from the same C sharp DTO?-- think --

A: One property is the source of truth; the other is a computed alias.

csharp.
public record OrderResponse(int Id, string State, decimal Total).
{.
[Obsolete("Use State; this alias will be removed in v2.")].
public string Status goes to State;
}.

The new name is the source of truth; the old name is the computed alias, so deleting the alias at sunset removes the old name and leaves the real property untouched. Both names serialize. Inbound requests use a custom Jason converter that fills State from either the status or the state field.
The old name has a documented sunset date.

Be clear about what [Obsolete] does and doesn't do: it is a C sharp compile-time attribute that warns code compiling against this assembly. It is invisible on the wire, doesn't change serialization, and an H T T P client never sees it.
The consumer-facing signal is deprecated: true on the old property in the published OpenAPI schema, plus the Deprecation / Sunset headers on the response.

Cross-Q²: Six months in, telemetry shows 12% of traffic still uses the old name. What do you do?-- think --

A: Investigate the top callers, likely S D K versions that ship with the old field name hard-coded.
Options: (1) ship updated S D K versions and ramp adoption via depandabot / changelog outreach; (2) extend the deprecation window by 3 months with explicit notice;
(3) introduce gradual brownouts (for example, return 503 for 1% of requests using the old name, ramping to 100%) so client teams notice in dashboards before the hard sunset.
The trap is "we said 6 months; pull the trigger no matter what", telemetry-driven sunsets respect actual adoption, scheduled sunsets respect the calendar, and the right answer is "calendar with telemetry as override."

-- pause --
Drill 8, Adding a new endpoint.

Q: Is adding a new endpoint always non-breaking?-- think --

A: For H T T P clients, yes, clients who never call it are unaffected. For S D K consumers, almost always yes (the new method just appears in the S D K).
The edge cases: (1) The new endpoint conflicts with a wildcard route consumed by clients (rare, app.MapGet("/orders/{anything}") ); (2) The new endpoint changes server behavior in a way visible to other endpoints (for example, adds a foreign key constraint that affects another endpoint's writes);
(3) Quota or rate limit shifts because the new endpoint shares a bucket with existing endpoints.

Cross-Q: A team adds /orders/{id}/cancel and discovers older client SDKs generated against the old spec don't know about it. Is that breakage?-- think --

A: No, the old S D K has no method to call the new endpoint, but old S D K calls to existing endpoints work unchanged. The S D K just needs regeneration to pick up the new method. This is normal evolution; document the new endpoint in the changelog and the next S D K release notes.

Cross-Q²: When does adding an endpoint break a client?-- think --

A: When the endpoint name collides with an existing route in a path-priority sense. Example: existing /orders/{id:int} for integer ID; new /orders or recent (a literal segment).
Most routers prefer literal segments over parameter segments, so /orders or 42 still hits the parametric route, but if you defined /orders/{recent} ambiguously you're in trouble. Test the route table after every addition.
A S P dot NET Core's route registration will warn on ambiguity at startup if MapControllers() finds conflict, but custom minimal A P I ordering can mask it.

-- pause --
Drill 9, graph Q L versioning.

Q: Does A P I versioning apply to graph Q L?-- think --

A: Not in the URL or version-number sense. graph Q L's design assumption is additive evolution: the schema describes everything available; clients query only the fields they need; new fields don't break old queries; removed fields require coordinated deprecation.
There's typically one graph Q L endpoint ( /graphql ) and one schema, evolving over time with @deprecated directives marking fields on the way out.

Cross-Q: A breaking change in graph Q L, say, changing a field's type from Int! to String!, happens occasionally. How is that handled without a v2 endpoint?-- think --

A: Three patterns. (1) Add the new field under a new name ( statusV2: String! ), deprecate the old, give clients time to migrate, eventually remove the old. (2) For very disruptive changes, ship a schema patch with a hard cutover date communicated weeks in advance.
(3) Some teams version the schema document (different /graphql or v2 endpoint) only for changes that can't be expressed as additive, rare. graph Q L's @deprecated directive is the workhorse.

Cross-Q²: graph Q L's "client picks fields" model means you don't break clients by adding fields, but you can break clients by adding resolvers that fail on data they don't expect to be queried. How?-- think --

A: Field-level overhead. If a new field's resolver hits a slow downstream service, clients who happen to query that field (perhaps because their query selects a fragment containing it) see latency spike.
Worse: a new resolver that throws under certain data conditions adds the field to the graph Q L errors array, which strict clients treat as request failure even though other fields succeeded.
Mitigation: feature flags on new fields ( @include(if: $clientOptIn) ), conservative resolver-level error handling (return null + add to errors, not throw), and per-field telemetry so you see new resolver perf separately from the request average.

-- pause --
Drill 10, Downstream library impact (S D K breaking changes).

Q: You bump the A P I to v2 cleanly. Your generated TypeScript S D K now has different method signatures. Is that an S D K breaking change?-- think --

A: Yes, and it's an expected one, but it must be communicated as such. Bump the S D K major version ( @acme or orders-sdk@2.0.0 ) when you regenerate for A P I v2. Consumers can pin v1 of the S D K to keep calling A P I v1 endpoints; v2 of the S D K targets v2 of the A P I.
Don't ship A P I v2 changes in a minor S D K version, that's how S D K consumers get woken up at 2 AM.

Cross-Q: A team has both A P I v1 and v2 in production simultaneously, and an S D K that supports both. Compatibility matrix design?-- think --

A: Two patterns. (1) Single S D K with versioned namespaces: OrdersClient.V1.GetOrder(.) and OrdersClient.V2.GetOrder(.), same npm or NuGet package, two A P I surfaces. Consumers import the version they target.
(2) Separate S D K packages per A P I major version: @acme or orders-sdk-v1 and @acme or orders-sdk-v2, clearer ownership, easier to deprecate one. Document a compatibility matrix: "S D K 1.x to A P I v1 only; S D K 2.x to A P I v1 and v2; S D K 3.x to A P I v2 only."

Cross-Q²: The S D K uses a refresh-token flow that calls /auth or refresh. You move that endpoint behind a new path in v2. S D K breaks across the board. How would the design have prevented this?-- think --

A: Auth endpoints should be versioned independently of resource endpoints, or pinned at the S D K level rather than tracking the latest A P I version. Many A P Is explicitly keep auth at /auth/. without /v1/ prefix because auth flow rarely changes and breaking it breaks every other call.
If you do version auth, the S D K should expose an explicit auth-endpoint config so consumers can stay on v1 auth while their resource calls migrate to v2. Coupling is the trap.

-- pause --
Drill 11, ApiVersion attribute in dot NET.

Q: Walk me through [ApiVersion] and the Asp.Versioning.* packages in dot NET.-- think --

A: Asp.Versioning.Mvc (or Asp.Versioning.Http for minimal A P Is) is the canonical package. You decorate the controller with [ApiVersion("1.0")] and [ApiVersion("2.0")], then individual actions with [MapToApiVersion("1.0")] or [MapToApiVersion("2.0")].
Configure the version reader ( UrlSegmentApiVersionReader, HeaderApiVersionReader, QueryStringApiVersionReader, MediaTypeApiVersionReader ) in AddApiVersioning(.). ReportApiVersions = true adds api-supported-versions and api-deprecated-versions headers automatically.

Cross-Q: A team sets AssumeDefaultVersionWhenUnspecified = true so unversioned requests get a fallback. What can go wrong?-- think --

A: When you ship v2 and change the default, clients that never specified a version get the new shape silently, exactly the breakage they were avoiding by not specifying.
Two safer options: (a) reject unversioned requests with 400 "version required"; (b) pin the default to the oldest stable version (v1 forever), so unversioned clients are stuck but stable. Never let "default" mean "latest."

Cross-Q²: Swagger / OpenAPI generation per version, what's the standard setup with AddApiExplorer ?-- think --

A: Two pieces, and it helps to keep them separate. The versioning side: after AddApiVersioning(.), chain .AddApiExplorer(opts goes to { opts.GroupNameFormat = "'v'V"; opts.SubstituteApiVersionInUrl = true; }) from Asp.Versioning.Mvc.ApiExplorer.
That doesn't emit any documents, it puts each A P I description into a group named v1, v2,. and substitutes the version placeholder in route templates so the docs show concrete URLs instead of v{version:api Version}. The document-generation side then creates one document per group.
Which generator that is depends on your dot NET version:
Swashbuckle was the template default for years and serves /swagger or v1 or swagger.json, but from dot NET 9 the web A P I templates ship Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi instead, one AddOpenApi(document Name) call per document plus MapOpenApi(), with the v1 document served at /openapi or v1.json.
Either way, name the documents from the version descriptions rather than hard-coding them, so a new [ApiVersion] doesn't silently go undocumented. Consumers can then pull the per-version spec and generate per-version SDKs.

-- pause --
Drill 12, Conditional requests and versioning.

Q: Conditional requests use ETag / If-None-Match for cache validation. How do they interact with versioning?-- think --

A: ETags are computed over the response body. The same resource at v1 and v2 has different bodies (added fields, renamed fields), so the ETags must differ, otherwise a v1 client with a cached ETag would get 304 Not Modified against v2's actual-different content.
Two approaches: (1) embed the version in the ETag computation ( etag = hash(version, body) ); (2) maintain separate cache namespaces per version so ETags never cross.

Cross-Q: A team uses URL versioning ( /v1 or orders or 42 versus /v2 or orders or 42 ) so the URLs are different and the cache naturally separates. Are there still gotchas?-- think --

A: Yes, intermediate caches (C D N, reverse proxies) might be configured to ignore the version path segment for cache-key purposes, or to canonicalize URLs. Verify the Cache-Control + Vary header behavior end-to-end.
Also: a client upgrading from v1 to v2 has stale v1 cache entries it should evict; document that SDKs should clear their H T T P cache on A P I version change.

Cross-Q²: A client uses If-Match for optimistic concurrency on writes ( PUT /orders or 42 with If-Match: "etag-xyz" ). What happens during version migration?-- think --

A: ETags from v1 reads aren't valid for v2 writes (different body computation). A client that GETs v1, then PUTs v2 with the v1 ETag, will get 412 Precondition Failed. Standard advice: re-read at the target version before writing.
S D K can encapsulate this: client.V2.UpdateOrder first GETs from v2 to refresh the ETag before issuing the PUT. The migration path needs explicit attention to read-modify-write cycles spanning versions.

-- pause --
Drill 13, Versioning versus feature flags.

Q: When do you use versioning versus feature flags for evolving behavior?-- think --

A: Versioning is for contract changes, the wire shape, the semantics of an endpoint, breaking-change events. Feature flags are for implementation changes, turn a new algorithm on for 1% of traffic, dark-launch a new dependency, A or B test a U X behavior, with no change in the A P I contract.
The signal: if external clients need to write different code to handle the change, version it; if it's the same contract with different internals, flag it.

Cross-Q: A team wants to add a new response field but ramp it to 10% of clients first via feature flag. Reasonable?-- think --

A: Risky. A response that includes the field for some clients and omits it for others creates a contract that's neither v1 nor v2, clients can't rely on whether the field exists.
Better: ship the field always (it's additive, non-breaking), but feature-flag the backing logic (the new calculation) so the field is null or 0 for clients in the 90% bucket and populated for the 10%. Contract is stable; backing logic ramps.

Cross-Q²: A feature flag controls whether a deprecated endpoint returns 410 Gone or still works. Is this versioning or feature flagging?-- think --

A: Versioning expressed as a flag, and acceptable for a defined transition window. Pattern: flag defaults to "still works" everywhere, then flip to "410" in non-production environments for a week, then production for an hour as a brownout, then permanently 410.
The flag is an operational lever for the sunset event; the underlying versioning decision (sunset v1) is fixed. Don't use the flag as ongoing toggling, that's contract chaos.

-- pause --
Drill 14, Removing an endpoint.

Q: Process for removing an endpoint that's been live for 3 years.-- think --

A: Six-step playbook. (1) Identify replacement (v2 endpoint, deprecation notice with successor link). (2) Telemetry: per-caller usage of the doomed endpoint for at least 3 months. (3) Announce: changelog, dev portal banner, emails to top callers, 6-12 months advance for public A P Is.
(4) Headers: Deprecation: @ + Sunset: + Link: on every response. (5) Final notice 30 days out, emails to remaining callers identified by telemetry. (6) Sunset: return 410 Gone with a body explaining the replacement, or 301 redirect if the URL is compatible.

Cross-Q: A few stragglers are still calling v1 the day before sunset. Do you push the date?-- think --

A: Judgment call based on who they are and what they're doing. If they're an internal team that simply forgot, push by a week, send a stern reminder, keep the schedule visible.
If they're external partners who've ignored 12 months of notice, sunset on schedule; their failure to migrate is not a reason to indefinitely extend.
The exception: critical-business-impact stragglers (a major customer's prod) get a private extension contract with a hard new date, not an open-ended grace period. Each extension undermines the credibility of every future deprecation.

Cross-Q²: After sunset, an attacker probes /v1 or orders, should the response be 410 Gone, 404 Not Found, or 301 Redirect to v2?-- think --

A: 410 Gone is the semantically correct answer, "this resource is permanently gone, intentionally." 404 implies "we don't recognize this URL," which can confuse clients into retrying.
301 redirects can be useful if the v2 URL has a compatible response shape (rare, usually breaking changes are why you removed it) and you want to ease the transition for the longest tail.
Combined: 410 with a body explaining the migration and linking to v2 docs is the most useful response for legitimate clients still on v1.

-- pause --
Drill 15, Backwards compatibility for clients you don't control.

Q: You have third-party clients you can't directly upgrade. How do you ship breaking changes?-- think --

A: Three principles. (1) Keep the old version running as long as it has paying users, never delete a major version that has revenue. (2) Build the new major version alongside, not in place, clients migrate at their own pace.
(3) Telemetry-driven sunset: only retire when usage falls a defined floor (for example, 0.1% of traffic, or zero paying customers in the past 30 days). The combination means breaking changes become a parallel universe rather than a replacement universe.

Cross-Q: One major customer pays you 30% of your revenue and refuses to migrate from v1. They're effectively holding the A P I hostage. What's the playbook?-- think --

A: This is a business problem dressed as a technical problem.
Options: (a) negotiate a contract with the customer that gates v1 maintenance behind their paying for it (dedicated support tier); (b) provide migration consulting / engineering hours to unblock them;
(c) keep v1 running as a frozen legacy that doesn't get new features, and document its limitations openly so internal teams know the cost; (d) deprecate features within v1 incrementally to push migration without a hard cutover.
The mistake is treating it as "we'll wait", without explicit cost attribution, v1 maintenance becomes free hostage-rent.

Cross-Q²: How do you avoid getting into this situation in the first place?-- think --

A: Versioning contract terms upfront. Standard S L A language: "We commit to supporting the current major version and the immediately previous major version.
Older versions enter end-of-life status with at least 12 months' notice." Customers signing up know the maintenance window; pricing reflects support commitment. The legal or business framework gives engineering license to sunset; without it, every deprecation is a customer-success battle.
Larger A P I providers (Twilio, Stripe, A W S) have explicit deprecation policies linked from their pricing pages exactly to make this dynamic clear before contracts are signed.

-- pause --
Section 2. Self-test.

No, if the server treats absence as the existing default behavior. Yes, if the server now validates that the field is present or has a non-default value. The principle: a 6-month-old client unaware of the new field must continue to succeed unchanged.
Testing rule: pin a copy of the old Postman collection / Pact contract and run it against the new server in CI.

When (a) the A P I is consumed by libraries that already set Accept for content negotiation, (b) URL stability matters for caching at intermediaries that don't include Accept in cache key by default, or (c) you're building a hypermedia A P I where each resource has a stable identity across versions.
In practice, header versioning loses on discoverability, engineers can't paste a v2 URL into a browser, gateway routing config gets ugly, ops can't grep logs by URL prefix. Pick URI unless you have a specific argument for the header path.

Imagine you ship v2 and change the default. Clients that never specified a version get the new shape silently, exactly the breakage clients-without-version-strategy were trying to dodge.
Two safer options: (a) reject unversioned requests with 400 "version required" so clients fail fast and explicitly, or (b) pin the default to the oldest stable version (v1 forever), so unversioned clients are stable but stuck. Never let "default" mean "latest."

Dated versioning makes every A P I change a "version" snapshot pinned to the account at integration time, the server preserves the response shape that was current then. Pro: no big breaking-version events; per-customer migration.
Con: server must maintain N parallel response shapes indefinitely, transformation layers between versions, and onboarding-doc complexity.
Stripe caps that N by grouping versions into named release trains ( .acacia, .basil, and the trains that followed):
breaking changes land only when a new train opens, and dated versions within a train are additive, so the number of genuinely distinct shapes tracks the number of trains rather than the number of dated releases.
For most A P Is, MAJOR-bumped URIs is simpler.

(1) Dual-publish docs with side-by-side migration examples; (2) Emit Deprecation: @ + Sunset: + Link:; rel="successor-version" on every v1 response so client teams see deprecation in their H T T P libraries automatically;
(3) Track per-client v1 usage telemetry (by A P I key or User-Agent ), proactively email the top 10 holdouts a month before sunset with their specific endpoint usage.
The combination beats blanket emails; deprecation only works when teams see real signal.